The GALE

ENCYCLOPEDIA

of MEDICINE SECOND EDITION

The GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA

of MEDICINE SECOND EDITION VOLUME

5 T-Z ORGANIZATIONS GENERAL INDEX

JACQUELINE L. LONGE, EDITOR D E I R D R E S . B L A N C H F I E L D , A S S O C I AT E E D I T O R

The GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA of MEDICINE SECOND EDITION STAFF

Jacqueline L. Longe, Project Editor Deirdre S. Blanchfield, Associate Editor Christine B. Jeryan, Managing Editor Donna Olendorf, Senior Editor Stacey Blachford, Associate Editor Kate Kretschmann, Melissa C. McDade, Ryan Thomason, Assistant Editors Mark Springer, Technical Specialist Andrea Lopeman, Programmer/Analyst Barbara J. Yarrow, Manager, Imaging and Multimedia Content Robyn V. Young, Project Manager, Imaging and Multimedia Content Dean Dauphinais, Senior Editor, Imaging and Multimedia Content Kelly A. Quin, Editor, Imaging and Multimedia Content Leitha Etheridge-Sims, Mary K. Grimes, Dave Oblender, Image Catalogers Pamela A. Reed, Imaging Coordinator Randy Bassett, Imaging Supervisor Robert Duncan, Senior Imaging Specialist Dan Newell, Imaging Specialist Christine O’Bryan, Graphic Specialist Maria Franklin, Permissions Manager Margaret A. Chamberlain, Permissions Specialist Michelle DiMercurio, Senior Art Director Mike Logusz, Graphic Artist Mary Beth Trimper, Manager, Composition and Electronic Prepress Evi Seoud, Assistant Manager, Composition Purchasing and Electronic Prepress Dorothy Maki, Manufacturing Manager Wendy Blurton, Senior Manufacturing Specialist

Since this page cannot legibly accommodate all copyright notices, the acknowledgments constitute an extension of the copyright notice. While every effort has been made to ensure the reliability of the information presented in this publication, the Gale Group neither guarantees the accuracy of the data contained herein nor assumes any responsibility for errors, omissions or discrepancies. The Gale Group accepts no payment for listing, and inclusion in the publication of any organization, agency, institution, publication, service, or individual does not imply endorsement of the editor or publisher. Errors brought to the attention of the publisher and verified to the satisfaction of the publisher will be corrected in future editions. This book is printed on recycled paper that meets Environmental Protection Agency standards. The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American National Standard for Information Sciences-Permanence Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984. This publication is a creative work fully protected by all applicable copyright laws, as well as by misappropriation, trade secret, unfair competition, and other applicable laws. The authors and editor of this work have added value to the underlying factual material herein through one or more of the following: unique and original selection, coordination, expression, arrangement, and classification of the information. Gale Group and design is a trademark used herein under license. All rights to this publication will be vigorously defended. Copyright © 2002 Gale Group 27500 Drake Road Farmington Hills, MI 48331-3535 All rights reserved including the right of reproduction in whole or in part in any form. ISBN 0-7876-5489-2 (set) 0-7876-5490-6 (Vol. 1) 0-7876-5491-4 (Vol. 2) 0-7876-5492-2 (Vol. 3) 0-7876-5493-0 (Vol. 4) 0-7876-5494-9 (Vol. 5) Printed in the United States of America 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Gale encyclopedia of medicine / Jacqueline L. Longe, editor; Deirdre S. Blanchfield, associate editor — 2nd ed. p. cm. Includes bibliographical references and index. Contents: Vol. 1. A-B — v. 2. C-F — v. 3. G-M — v. 4. N-S — v. 5. T-Z. ISBN 0-7876-5489-2 (set: hardcover) — ISBN 0-7876-5490-6 (vol. 1) — ISBN 0-7876-5491-4 (vol. 2) — ISBN 0-7876-5492-2 (vol. 3) — ISBN 0-7876-5493-0 (vol. 4) — ISBN 0-7876-5494-9 (vol. 5) 1. Internal medicine—Encyclopedias. I. Longe, Jacqueline L. II. Blanchfield, Deirdre S. III. Gale Research Company. RC41.G35 2001 616’.003—dc21 2001051245

CONTENTS

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix Advisory Board . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiii Entries Volume 1: A-B . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 Volume 2: C-F . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 625 Volume 3: G-M . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1375 Volume 4: N-S . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2307 Volume 5: T-Z . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3237 Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3603 General Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3625

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

V

PLEASE READ—IMPORTANT INFORMATION

The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 is a medical reference product designed to inform and educate readers about a wide variety of disorders, conditions, treatments, and diagnostic tests. The Gale Group believes the product to be comprehensive, but not necessarily definitive. It is intended to supplement, not replace, consultation with a physician or other healthcare practitioner. While the Gale Group has made substantial efforts to provide information that is accurate, comprehensive, and up-to-date, the Gale Group makes no representations or warranties of any

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

kind, including without limitation, warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose, nor does it guarantee the accuracy, comprehensiveness, or timeliness of the information contained in this product. Readers should be aware that the universe of medical knowledge is constantly growing and changing, and that differences of medical opinion exist among authorities. Readers are also advised to seek professional diagnosis and treatment for any medical condition, and to discuss information obtained from this book with their health care provider.

VII

INTRODUCTION

The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 (GEM2) is a one-stop source for medical information on nearly 1,700 common medical disorders, conditions, tests, and treatments, including high-profile diseases such as AIDS, Alzheimer’s disease, cancer, and heart attack. This encyclopedia avoids medical jargon and uses language that laypersons can understand, while still providing thorough coverage of each topic. The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 fills a gap between basic consumer health resources, such as single-volume family medical guides, and highly technical professional materials. SCOPE

Almost 1,700 full-length articles are included in the Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2, including disorders/ conditions, tests/procedures, and treatments/therapies. Many common drugs are also covered, with generic drug names appearing first and brand names following in parentheses, eg. acetaminophen (Tylenol). Throughout the Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2, many prominent individuals are highlighted as sidebar biographies that accompany the main topical essays. Articles follow a standardized format that provides information at a glance. Rubrics include: Disorders/Conditions

Tests/Treatments

Definition Description Causes and symptoms Diagnosis Treatment Alternative treatment Prognosis Prevention Resources Key terms

Definition Purpose Precautions Description Preparation Aftercare Risks Normal/Abnormal results Resources Key terms

In recent years there has been a resurgence of interest in holistic medicine that emphasizes the connection between mind and body. Aimed at achieving and maintaining good health rather than just eliminating disease, GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

this approach has come to be known as alternative medicine. The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 includes a number of essays on alternative therapies, ranging from traditional Chinese medicine to homeopathy and from meditation to aromatherapy. In addition to full essays on alternative therapies, the encyclopedia features specific Alternative treatment sections for diseases and conditions that may be helped by complementary therapies.

INCLUSION CRITERIA

A preliminary list of diseases, disorders, tests and treatments was compiled from a wide variety of sources, including professional medical guides and textbooks as well as consumer guides and encyclopedias. The general advisory board, made up of public librarians, medical librarians and consumer health experts, evaluated the topics and made suggestions for inclusion. The list was sorted by category and sent to GEM2 medical advisors, certified physicians with various medical specialities, for review. Final selection of topics to include was made by the medical advisors in conjunction with the Gale Group editor.

ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS

The essays were compiled by experienced medical writers, including physicians, pharmacists, nurses, and other health care professionals. GEM2 medical advisors reviewed the completed essays to insure that they are appropriate, up-to-date, and medically accurate.

HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 has been designed with ready reference in mind. • Straight alphabetical arrangement allows users to locate information quickly. • Bold-faced terms function as print hyperlinks that point the reader to related entries in the encyclopedia. IX

Introduction

• Cross-references placed throughout the encyclopedia direct readers to where information on subjects without entries can be found. Synonyms are also cross-referenced. • A list of key terms are provided where appropriate to define unfamiliar terms or concepts. • Valuable contact information for organizations and support groups is included with each entry. The appendix contains an extensive list of organizations arranged in alphabetical order.

X

• Resources section directs users to additional sources of medical information on a topic. • A comprehensive general index allows users to easily target detailed aspects of any topic, including Latin names. GRAPHICS

The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 is enhanced with over 675 color images, including photos, charts, tables, and customized line drawings.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

ADVISORY BOARD A number of experts in the library and medical communities provided invaluable assistance in the formulation of this encyclopedia. Our advisory board performed a myriad of duties, from defining the scope of coverage to reviewing individual entries for accuracy and accessibility. The editor would like to express her appreciation to them.

MEDICAL ADVISORS

A. Richard Adrouny, M.D., F.A.C.P. Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine Division of Oncology Stanford University Director of Medical Oncology Community Hospital of Los GatosSaratoga Los Gatos, CA Laurie Barclay, M.D. Neurological Consulting Services Tampa, FL Kenneth J. Berniker, M.D. Attending Physician Emergency Department Kaiser Permanente Medical Center Vallejo, CA Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, M.D. Durham, NC Robin Dipasquale, N.D. Clinical Faculty Bastyr University Seattle, WA Faye Fishman, D.O. Randolph, NJ J. Gary Grant, M.D. Pacific Grove, CA Laith F. Gulli, M.D. M.Sc., M.Sc.(MedSci), MSA, Msc.Psych., MRSNZ FRSH, FRIPHH, FAIC, FZS DAPA, DABFC, DABCI

Consultant Psychotherapist in Private Practice Lathrup Village, MI L. Anne Hirschel, D.D.S. Southfield, MI Larry I. Lutwick M.D., F.A.C.P. Director, Infectious Diseases VA Medical Center Brooklyn, NY Ira Michelson, M.D., M.B.A., F.A.C.O.G. Physician and Clinical Instructor University of Michigan Ann Arbor, MI Susan Mockus, M.D. Scientific Consultant Seattle, WA Ralph M. Myerson, M.D., F.A.C.P. Clinical Professor of Medicine Medical College of Pennsylvania– Hahnemann University Philadelphia, PA Ronald Pies, M.D. Clinical Professor of Psychiatry Tufts University School of Medicine Boston, MA

The Permanente Medical Group Richmond, CA Amy B. Tuteur, M.D. Sharon, MA LIBRARIAN ADVISORS

Maureen O. Carleton, MLIS Medical Reference Specialist King County Library System Bellevue, WA Elizabeth Clewis Crim, MLS Collection Specialist Prince William Public Library, VA Valerie J. Lawrence, MLS Assistant Librarian Western States Chiropractic College Portland, OR Barbara J. O’Hara, MLS Adult Services Librarian Free Library of Philadelphia, PA Alan M. Rees, MLS Professor Emeritus Case Western Reserve University Cleveland, OH

Lecturer on Psychiatry Harvard Medical School Cambridge, MA Lee A. Shratter, M.D. Staff Radiologist

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

XI

CONTRIBUTORS

Margaret Alic, Ph.D. Science Writer Eastsound, WA

Donald G. Barstow, R.N. Clincal Nurse Specialist Oklahoma City, OK

Maury M. Breecher, Ph.D. Health Communicator/Journalist Northport, AL

Janet Byron Anderson Linguist/Language Consultant Rocky River, OH

Carin Lea Beltz, M.S. Genetic Counselor and Program Director The Center for Genetic Counseling Indianapolis, IN

Ruthan Brodsky Medical Writer Bloomfield Hills, MI

Lisa Andres, M.S., C.G.C. Certified Genetic Counselor and Medical Writer San Jose, CA Greg Annussek Medical Writer/Editor New York, NY Bill Asenjo, M.S., C.R.C. Science Writer Iowa City, IA Sharon A. Aufox, M.S., C.G.C. Genetic Counselor Rockford Memorial Hospital Rockford, IL

Linda K. Bennington, C.N.S. Science Writer Virginia Beach, VA Issac R. Berniker Medical Writer Vallejo, CA Kathleen Berrisford, M.S.V. Science Writer Bethanne Black Medical Writer Atlanta, GA

Sandra Bain Cushman Massage Therapist, Alexander Technique Practitioner Charlottesville, VA

Jennifer Bowjanowski, M.S., C.G.C. Genetic Counselor Children’s Hospital Oakland Oakland, CA

Howard Baker Medical Writer North York, Ontario

Michelle Q. Bosworth, M.S., C.G.C. Genetic Counselor Eugene, OR

Laurie Barclay, M.D. Neurological Consulting Services Tampa, FL

Barbara Boughton Health and Medical Writer El Cerrito, CA

Jeanine Barone Nutritionist, Exercise Physiologist New York, NY

Cheryl Branche, M.D. Retired General Practitioner Jackson, MS

Julia R. Barrett Science Writer Madison, WI

Michelle Lee Brandt Medical Writer San Francisco, CA

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tom Brody, Ph.D. Science Writer Berkeley, CA Leonard C. Bruno, Ph.D. Medical Writer Chevy Chase, MD Diane Calbrese Medical Sciences and Technology Writer Silver Spring, Maryland Richard H. Camer Editor International Medical News Group Silver Spring, MD Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, M.D. Medical Writer Durham, NC Lata Cherath, Ph.D. Science Writing Intern Cancer Research Institute New York, NY Linda Chrisman Massage Therapist and Educator Oakland, CA Lisa Christenson, Ph.D. Science Writer Hamden, CT Geoffrey N. Clark, D.V.M. Editor Canine Sports Medicine Update Newmarket, NH XIII

Contributors

Rhonda Cloos, R.N. Medical Writer Austin, TX Gloria Cooksey, C.N.E Medical Writer Sacramento, CA Amy Cooper, M.A., M.S.I. Medical Writer Vermillion, SD David A. Cramer, M.D. Medical Writer Chicago, IL Esther Csapo Rastega, R.N., B.S.N. Medical Writer Holbrook, MA Arnold Cua, M.D. Physician Brooklyn, NY Tish Davidson, A.M. Medical Writer Fremont, California Dominic De Bellis, Ph.D. Medical Writer/Editor Mahopac, NY Lori De Milto Medical Writer Sicklerville, NJ Robert S. Dinsmoor Medical Writer South Hamilton, MA

Thomas Scott Eagan Student Researcher University of Arizona Tucson, AZ Altha Roberts Edgren Medical Writer Medical Ink St. Paul, MN Karen Ericson, R.N. Medical Writer Estes Park, CO L. Fleming Fallon Jr., M.D., Dr.PH Associate Professor of Public Health Bowling Green State University Bowling Green, OH

Julie A. Gelderloos Biomedical Writer Playa del Rey, CA Gary Gilles, M.A. Medical Writer Wauconda, IL Harry W. Golden Medical Writer Shoreline Medical Writers Old Lyme, CT Debra Gordon Medical Writer Nazareth, PA Megan Gourley Writer Germantown, MD

Faye Fishman, D.O. Physician Randolph, NJ

Jill Granger, M.S. Senior Research Associate University of Michigan Ann Arbor, MI

Janis Flores Medical Writer Lexikon Communications Sebastopol, CA

Alison Grant Medical Writer Averill Park, NY

Risa Flynn Medical Writer Culver City, CA Paula Ford-Martin Medical Writer Chaplin, MN

Stephanie Dionne, B.S. Medical Writer Ann Arbor, MI

Janie F. Franz Writer Grand Forks, ND

Martin W. Dodge, Ph.D. Technical Writer/Editor Centinela Hospital and Medical Center Inglewood, CA

Sallie Freeman, Ph.D., B.S.N. Medical Writer Atlanta, GA

Elliot Greene, M.A. former president, American Massage Therapy Association Massage Therapist Silver Spring, MD Peter Gregutt Writer Asheville, NC Laith F. Gulli, M.D. M.Sc., M.Sc.(MedSci), M.S.A., Msc.Psych, MRSNZ FRSH, FRIPHH, FAIC, FZS DAPA, DABFC, DABCI Consultant Psychotherapist in Private Practice Lathrup Village, MI

David Doermann Medical Writer Salt Lake City, UT

Rebecca J. Frey, Ph.D. Research and Administrative Associate East Rock Institute New Haven, CT

Stefanie B. N. Dugan, M.S. Genetic Counselor Milwaukee, WI

Cynthia L. Frozena, R.N. Nurse, Medical Writer Manitowoc, WI

Maureen Haggerty Medical Writer Ambler, PA

Doug Dupler, M.A. Science Writer Boulder, CO

Ron Gasbarro, Pharm.D. Medical Writer New Milford, PA

Clare Hanrahan Medical Writer Asheville, NC

XIV

Kapil Gupta, M.D. Medical Writer Winston-Salem, NC

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Judy C. Hawkins, M.S. Genetic Counselor The University of Texas Medical Branch Galveston, TX Caroline Helwick Medical Writer New Orleans, LA David Helwig Medical Writer London, Ontario Lisette Hilton Medical Writer Boca Raton, FL Katherine S. Hunt, M.S. Genetic Counselor University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center Albuquerque, NM Kevin Hwang, M.D. Medical Writer Morristown, NJ Holly Ann Ishmael, M.S., C.G.C. Genetic Counselor The Children’s Mercy Hospital Kansas City, MO

West Chester, PA Beth A. Kapes Medical Writer Bay Village, OH Christine Kuehn Kelly Medical Writer Havertown, PA Bob Kirsch Medical Writer Ossining, NY Joseph Knight, P.A. Medical Writer Winton, CA Melissa Knopper Medical Writer Chicago, IL Karen Krajewski, M.S., C.G.C. Genetic Counselor Assistant Professor of Neurology Wayne State University Detroit, MI Jeanne Krob, M.D., F.A.C.S. Physician, writer Pittsburgh, PA Jennifer Lamb Medical Writer Spokane, WA

John T. Lohr, Ph.D. Assistant Director, Biotechnology Center Utah State University Logan, UT Larry Lutwick, M.D., F.A.C.P. Director, Infectious Diseases VA Medical Center Brooklyn, NY Suzanne M. Lutwick Medical Writer Brooklyn, NY Nicole Mallory, M.S. Medical Student Wayne State University Detroit, MI Warren Maltzman, Ph.D. Consultant, Molecular Pathology Demarest, NJ Adrienne Massel, R.N. Medical Writer Beloit, WI Ruth E. Mawyer, R.N. Medical Writer Charlottesville, VA

Richard H. Lampert Senior Medical Editor W.B. Saunders Co. Philadelphia, PA

Richard A. McCartney M.D. Fellow, American College of Surgeons Diplomat American Board of Surgery Richland, WA

Jeffrey P. Larson, R.P.T. Physical Therapist Sabin, MN

Bonny McClain, Ph.D. Medical Writer Greensboro, NC

Jill Lasker Medical Writer Midlothian, VA

Sally C. McFarlane-Parrott Medical Writer Ann Arbor, MI

Paul A. Johnson, Ed.M. Medical Writer San Diego, CA

Kristy Layman Music Therapist East Lansing, MI

Mercedes McLaughlin Medical Writer Phoenixville, CA

Cindy L. A. Jones, Ph.D. Biomedical Writer Sagescript Communications Lakewood, CO

Victor Leipzig, Ph.D. Biological Consultant Huntington Beach, CA

Alison McTavish, M.Sc. Medical Writer and Editor Montreal, Quebec

Lorraine Lica, Ph.D. Medical Writer San Diego, CA

Liz Meszaros Medical Writer Lakewood, OH

Dawn A. Jacob, M.S. Genetic Counselor Obstetrix Medical Group of Texas Fort Worth, TX Sally J. Jacobs, Ed.D. Medical Writer Los Angeles, CA Michelle L. Johnson, M.S., J.D. Patent Attorney and Medical Writer Portland, OR

David Kaminstein, M.D. Medical Writer

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

XV

Contributors

Ann M. Haren Science Writer Madison, CT

Contributors

Betty Mishkin Medical Writer Skokie, IL

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, M.D. Medical Writer Phoenix, AZ

Belinda Rowland, Ph.D. Medical Writer Voorheesville, NY

Barbara J. Mitchell Medical Writer Hallstead, PA

Scott Polzin, M.S., C.G.C. Medical Writer Buffalo Grove, IL

Andrea Ruskin, M.D. Whittingham Cancer Center Norwalk, CT

Mark A. Mitchell, M.D. Medical Writer Seattle, WA

Elizabeth J. Pulcini, M.S. Medical Writer Phoenix, Arizona

Susan J. Montgomery Medical Writer Milwaukee, WI

Laura Ruth, Ph.D. Medical, Science, & Technology Writer Los Angeles, CA

Nada Quercia, M.S., C.C.G.C. Genetic Counselor Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics The Hospital for Sick Children Toronto, ON, Canada

Louann W. Murray, PhD Medical Writer Huntington Beach, CA Bilal Nasser, M.Sc. Senior Medical Student Universidad Iberoamericana Santo Domingo, Domincan Republic

Ann Quigley Medical Writer New York, NY

Laura Ninger Medical Writer Weehawken, NJ

Robert Ramirez, B.S. Medical Student University of Medicine & Dentistry of New Jersey Stratford, NJ

Nancy J. Nordenson Medical Writer Minneapolis, MN

Kulbir Rangi, D.O. Medical Doctor and Writer New York, NY

Teresa Norris, R.N. Medical Writer Ute Park, NM

Esther Csapo Rastegari, Ed.M., R.N./B.S.N. Registered Nurse, Medical Writer Holbrook, MA

Lisa Papp, R.N. Medical Writer Cherry Hill, NJ Patience Paradox Medical Writer Bainbridge Island, WA Barbara J. Pettersen Genetic Counselor Genetic Counseling of Central Oregon Bend, OR Genevieve Pham-Kanter, M.S. Medical Writer Chicago, IL Collette Placek Medical Writer Wheaton, IL XVI

Toni Rizzo Medical Writer Salt Lake City, UT Martha Robbins Medical Writer Evanston, IL Richard Robinson Medical Writer Tucson, AZ Nancy Ross-Flanigan Science Writer Belleville, MI Anna Rovid Spickler, D.V.M., Ph.D. Medical Writer Moorehead, KY

Karen Sandrick Medical Writer Chicago, IL Kausalya Santhanam, Ph.D. Technical Writer Branford, CT Jason S. Schliesser, D.C. Chiropractor Holland Chiropractic, Inc. Holland, OH Joan Schonbeck Medical Writer Nursing Massachusetts Department of Mental Health Marlborough, MA Laurie Heron Seaver, M.D. Clinical Geneticist Greenwood Genetic Center Greenwood, SC Catherine Seeley Medical Writer Kristen Mahoney Shannon, M.S., C.G.C. Genetic Counselor Center for Cancer Risk Analysis Massachusetts General Hospital Boston, MA Kim A. Sharp, M.Ln. Writer Richmond, TX Judith Sims, M.S. Medical Writer Logan, UT Joyce S. Siok, R.N. Medical Writer South Windsor, CT

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Liz Swain Medical Writer San Diego, CA

Patricia Skinner Medical Writer Amman, Jordan

Deanna M. Swartout-Corbeil, R.N. Medical Writer Thompsons Station, TN

Genevieve Slomski, Ph.D. Medical Writer New Britain, CT Stephanie Slon Medical Writer Portland, OR Linda Wasmer Smith Medical Writer Albuquerque, NM Java O. Solis, M.S. Medical Writer Decatur, GA Elaine Souder, PhD Medical Writer Little Rock, AR Jane E. Spehar Medical Writer Canton, OH Lorraine Steefel, R.N. Medical Writer Morganville, NJ Kurt Sternlof Science Writer New Rochelle, NY Roger E. Stevenson, M.D. Director Greenwood Genetic Center Greenwood, SC Dorothy Stonely Medical Writer Los Gatos, CA

Keith Tatarelli, J.D. Medical Writer Mary Jane Tenerelli, M.S. Medical Writer East Northport, NY

Amy Vance, M.S., C.G.C. Genetic Counselor GeneSage, Inc. San Francisco, CA Michael Sherwin Walston Student Researcher University of Arizona Tucson, AZ Ronald Watson, Ph.D. Science Writer Tucson, AZ

Catherine L. Tesla, M.S., C.G.C. Senior Associate, Faculty Dept. of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics Emory University School of Medicine Atlanta, GA

Ellen S. Weber, M.S.N. Medical Writer Fort Wayne, IN

Bethany Thivierge Biotechnical Writer/Editor Technicality Resources Rockland, ME

Jennifer F. Wilson, M.S. Science Writer Haddonfield, NJ

Mai Tran, Pharm.D. Medical Writer Troy, MI Carol Turkington Medical Writer Lancaster, PA Judith Turner, B.S. Medical Writer Sandy, UT

Ken R. Wells Freelance Writer Laguna Hills, CA

Kathleen D. Wright, R.N. Medical Writer Delmar, DE Jennifer Wurges Medical Writer Rochester Hills, MI Mary Zoll, Ph.D. Science Writer Newton Center, MA

Amy B. Tuteur, M.D. Medical Advisor Sharon, MA

Jon Zonderman Medical Writer Orange, CA

Samuel Uretsky, Pharm.D. Medical Writer Wantagh, NY

Michael V. Zuck, Ph.D. Medical Writer Boulder, CO

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Contributors

Jennifer Sisk Medical Writer Havertown, PA

XVII

T Taeniasis see Tapeworm diseases Tagged red blood cell scan see GI bleeding studies

T’ai chi Definition T’ai chi is a Chinese exercise system that uses slow, smooth body movements to achieve a state of relaxation of both body and mind.

Purpose As a system of physical exercise used to improve and maintain health, t’ai chi can be helpful in achieving a state of physical and mental relaxation while also strengthening the cardiovascular system.

Precautions As a very slow and gentle form of moving, t’ai chi has virtually no side effects. However, if a person has any doubts about the condition of his or her joints, vertebrae, or heart, a physician should be consulted.

Description Developed originally in China as a self-defense strategy, or martial art, t’ai chi—the “supreme ultimate fist”—is practiced in modern times primarily as a gentle exercise technique. Described as “meditation in motion,” t’ai chi consists of a standing person performing a series of postures or bodily movements in a slow and graceful manner, with each movement flowing without pause to the next. According to Chinese legend, the technique was created by a Taoist monk who was inspired as he watched a crane and a snake do battle. Impressed by the snake’s ability to subtly and swiftly avoid the bird’s thrusts, he devised a series of self-defense techniques GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

that do not involve meeting the opponent’s force with force, but rather stress evading the blow; causing the opponent’s own momentum to work against him. T’ai chi is an ancient form of exercise, about 2,000 years old, that at one point had over 100 separate movements or postures. In current practice, there are two popular versions, of 18 and 37 movements respectively. The fact that in China 10 million people practice some type of t’ai chi daily suggests that it is one of the most popular forms of exercise in the world. In the United States, t’ai chi is learned in classes in which students (or “players,” as they are called in China) wear loose, comfortable clothing and either go barefoot or wear only socks or soft shoes on the feet. In China, t’ai chi is almost always practiced outdoors at dawn, and ideally near trees. Unlike other martial arts, t’ai chi is not competitive. Classes usually begin with a few minutes of standing meditation to calm the mind and gather energy. Following warm-up exercises, students are taught the basics of a particular form or posture. Learning forms is not easy, and it takes some time to master what looks like a simple position. Properly done postures are done in a relaxed, artful, and linked way, with the circular and rhythmic movements of one position flowing seamlessly into the next. While strict attention to body position is critical, proper breathing is considered to be equally important. Just as movements are slow and continuous and without strain, breathing should be effortless yet deep. Finally, both mental and physical balance is considered essential to t’ai chi. The experienced practitioner of t’ai chi maintains perfect body balance throughout the exercise series. Altogether, the five essential qualities of t’ai chi are: • Slowness. To develop awareness. • Lightness. To make movements flow. • Balance. To prevent body strain. • Calmness. To maintain continuity. • Clarity. To focus the mind. T’ai chi has both physical and mental benefits. If done regularly, it improves muscle tone, flexibility, balance, and 3237

Tapeworm diseases

KEY TERMS Arthritis—Inflammation of the joints. Cardiovascular—Relating to the heart and blood vessels. Continuity—Uninterrupted and successive. Meditation—An exercise of contemplation that induces a temporary feeling of relaxation. Stamina—Staying power, endurance. Yoga—A system of exercise aimed at promoting the control of the body and the mind.

T’ai chi is a Chinese exercise system that uses slow, smooth body movements to achieve a state of relaxation. The posture above is part of the single whip sequence of t’ai chi motions. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

coordination. Many older people find that it boosts their energy, stamina, and agility, sharpens their reflexes, and gives an overall sense of well-being. The calming and meditative aspects of t’ai chi allow many to experience its ability to relieve stress. Some claim t’ai chi to be a healing therapy, and it is often used to support other treatments for chronic conditions; arthritis and digestive disorders are just two examples. Like yoga, t’ai chi has several different styles to suit the individual. Also, it can eventually be done daily by oneself, and ultimately becomes a very personal endeavor. Most Westerners find it best to practice t’ai chi in the same place and at the same time of day, and those who enjoy it most are those who are not seeking major, dramatic breakthroughs, but rather who can take pleasure in small gains that accumulate over a long period of time.

Risks T’ai chi is a safe exercise system for people of all ages and fitness levels. Done properly, without any over-stretching, t’ai chi should not leave a person feeling tired or sore.

falling, especially important for the elderly. T’ai chi can result in a significant improvement in the quality of life for anyone. But, because of the low stress level of the exercises it is a particularly attractive form of exercise to seniors. Resources BOOKS

Crompton, Paul. T’ai Chi. New York: Macmillan, 1996. Guiness, Alma E. Family Guide to Natural Medicine. Pleasantville, NY: The Reader’s Digest Association, Inc., 1993. Parry, Robert. T’ai Chi. Chicago: NTC Publishing Group, 1997. PERIODICALS

Brody, Jane. “T’ai Chi Offers Gentle, Stylized Exercises.” The New York Times, 16 July 1997, C1. Krucoff, Carol. “Western Science Studies Healing Effects of Ancient Eastern Practice.” The Washington Post, 14 Apr. 1998, 28, 30. ORGANIZATIONS

The Northeastern T’ai Chi Chuan Association. 163 West 23rd St., 5th Floor., New York, NY 10011 (212) 741-1922.

Leonard C. Bruno, PhD

Tailbone injuries see Coccyx injuries Talipes see Clubfoot Tamoxifen see Anticancer drugs Tamponade see Cardiac tamponade

Normal results Besides its overall fitness benefits and stress reduction aspects, regular t’ai chi sessions are said to be especially helpful for seniors, as they lower their blood pressure. T’ai chi claims to benefit arthritis sufferers, those recovering from an injury or rehabilitating their hearts, and also improves balance, and therefore, reduces the risk of 3238

Tapeworm diseases Definition Tapeworms are a group of parasitic worms that live in the intestinal tracts of some animals. Several different GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tapeworm diseases

species of tapeworms can infect humans. Tapeworm disease or cestodiasis occurs most commonly after eating raw or undercooked meat or fish that contains the immature form of the tapeworm.

Description Tapeworm infections pose a serious public health problem in many less developed countries due to poor sanitation conditions. The disease is most common where livestock, such as cattle and pigs, are raised in areas where human feces are not disposed of in a sanitary manner. Another common source of human tapeworms are certain species of freshwater fish. Tapeworm infections tend to occur more frequently in areas of the world where the people regularly eat raw or undercooked beef, pork, or fish. Persons of all ages and both sexes are susceptible to tapeworm infection, but children are generally not exposed until they are old enough to begin eating meat or fish. Tapeworm is less common in industrialized regions of the world, but travel to areas in which tapeworm infections are more common and immigration of people from these areas serve as new sources of the parasite. Infected persons are often unaware of the presence of adult tapeworms in their intestinal tract, as they may have no obvious symptoms of infection. Some tapeworms can live in an infected person for over 10 years if diagnosis is not made and treatment is not administered. In addition to the typical infection caused by eating undercooked meat or fish, people may also be directly infected by ingesting tapeworm eggs shed by the adult worm. This type of tapeworm infection can lead to a condition referred to as cysticercosis, in which the larvae continue to develop within tissues other than the intestinal tract. One of the most serious forms of this disease occurs when the tapeworm larvae infect the central nervous system, a disease referred to as neurocysticercosis. In contrast to a typical tapeworm infection, which may not be associated with symptoms, neurocysticercosis is a serious condition that may cause seizures and is potentially life-threatening.

Causes and symptoms Several species of tapeworm can infect people. The two most common species are the pork tapeworm (Taenia solium) and the beef tapeworm (Taenia saginata). Improperly treated human sewage may be used to fertilize pastures or crops. Pigs or cattle become infected by grazing in contaminated pastures or drinking water contaminated with tapeworm eggs from human feces. The peasized larvae of these tapeworms are deposited in certain tissues of the body of infected pigs and cattle, including the muscles. The infection is then transmitted to people GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The head of an adult beef tapeworm. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

when raw or undercooked meat containing tapeworm larvae is consumed. The immature tapeworm develops into the adult form in the human intestine and may remain there for many years if not identified and treated. The Taenia tapeworms attach to the intestinal walls but cause only mild inflammation at the site of attachment. As a result, most tapeworm carriers show no symptoms (asymptomatic) and usually become aware of the infection only after noticing tapeworm segments in their feces. Segments of the beef tapeworm may spontaneously pass through the anus causing a noticeable sensation. Mild gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea or abdominal pain, can occur in infected individuals. In rare cases where the tapeworm segments migrate into the appendix, pancreas, or bile duct, there may be a sudden onset of severe abdominal discomfort. Cysticercosis is a potentially serious complication of Taenia solium infection in which the larvae develop outside the intestinal tract. This type of infection is less common and occurs following accidental consumption of tapeworm eggs released from the adult worm. These eggs initially are localized in the anal area, but they may also contaminate the fingers or other parts of the body. Infection can occur in the person harboring the adult tapeworm or in other people with whom that individual comes in contact. The tapeworm larvae may develop in various tissues throughout the body. The most serious clinical problems occur when the larvae develop in the central nervous system (neurocysticercosis), potentially 3239

Tapeworm diseases

passed from one person to another. Transmission is usually the result of inadvertent ingestion of tapeworm eggs from feces eliminated by infected individuals. As a result, infection with this tapeworm is encountered most frequently in children, the developmentally disabled, and psychiatric patient populations. Abdominal pain that is not localized to any particular area is the most common complaint. Patients may experience loose bowel movements or diarrhea with mucus, but bloody diarrhea is rare. Another small tapeworm capable of infecting people is the rodent tapeworm (Hymenolepis diminuta). Rats, mice, and other rodents are the usual hosts for the adult tapeworm (definitive host), but humans can become infected following accidental consumption of insects containing tapeworm larvae. Meal worms or grain beetles that infest cereal, flour, or dried fruit are the most likely source of infection. Most human infections are not associated with symptoms, although some individuals report headaches, anorexia, nausea, and diarrhea. The head of an adult pork tapeworm. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

causing seizures and other neurological problems. An important aspect of this type of infection is that poor hygiene on the part of the individuals harboring an adult tapeworm can lead to an infection in an individual who may never consume meat. This is a particular problem if infected individuals are employed as food handlers. Another important tapeworm that may infect people is the fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum). This is a frequent human intestinal parasite in many areas where raw freshwater fish is consumed. Human infection with the fish tapeworm is referred to as diphyllobothriasis. Feces from infected hosts or raw sewage contaminates a fresh water source. Tapeworm larvae are initially ingested by freshwater crustaceans and then are eaten by fish. Human infection occurs when a person consumes raw fish contaminated with the tapeworm larvae. Adult tapeworms then develop in the human intestinal tract. Most infections with the fish tapeworm are not associated with symptoms. The tapeworm causes little damage to the lining of the intestine. Infected individuals may report diarrhea, fatigue, weakness, or sensations of hunger more commonly than uninfected individuals. One problem unique to this tapeworm is that it may compete with the host for absorption of vitamin B12 from the small intestine, causing the person to become deficient in this vitamin and leading to a condition called pernicious anemia. Two smaller species of tapeworms may also infect people. The dwarf tapeworm (Hymenolepis nana) is a common infection throughout the world that can be 3240

Diagnosis Identification of tapeworm segments or eggs in a stool sample is necessary for diagnosis of an adult tapeworm infection. In many cases, a tentative diagnosis may be made on the basis of a patient’s description of short chains of tapeworm segments in their stool. Further evaluation is recommended to determine the actual species involved since infection with Taenia solium is potentially more serious due to the added risk of cysticercosis. Whenever possible, tapeworm segments should be carefully collected in water or salt solutions, using strict precautions to avoid contamination. Stool examination should be performed in a laboratory having experience in the diagnosis of intestinal parasites. It is recommended that at least three stool samples be collected on alternate days to increase the likelihood of being able to make an accurate diagnosis. Although the general appearance of tapeworm segments from the two Taenia species is quite similar, trained laboratory personnel can detect distinct differences between the beef and pork tapeworms when samples are examined under a microscope. Tapeworm segments and eggs from the fish tapeworm and the dwarf tapeworm have characteristic appearances that allow accurate differentiation from the Taenia species of worms. Other diagnostic procedures may be necessary when cysticercosis is suspected. Blood samples from an infected individual are collected to look for the presence of antibodies against the tapeworm larvae. In cases in which infection of the central nervous system is present, advanced imaging tests, such as computed tomography scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), may be necessary to determine the exact location of the tapeworm larvae within the body. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Cestodiasis—Parasitic infection caused by the presence of adult tapeworms of the class Cestoda within the intestinal tract. Infection is caused by accidental consumption of tapeworm larvae. Cysticercosis—Parasitic infection caused by the presence of immature tapeworm larvae (cysticerci) that have developed outside the intestinal tract. Infection is caused by accidental consumption of tapeworm eggs. Diphyllobothriasis—Parasitic infection caused by the presence of tapeworms from the Diphyllobothrium genus, such as the fish tapeworm (Diphyllobothrium latum). Hymenolepiasis—Parasitic infection caused by the presence of tapeworms from the Hymenolepis genus, such as the dwarf tapeworm (Hymenolepis nana) or the rodent tapeworm (Hymenolepis diminuta). Neurocysticercosis—Parasitic infection caused by the presence of immature tapeworm larvae within the central nervous system. Pernicious anemia—Type of anemia caused by a deficiency in vitamin B12. Taeniasis—Parasitic infection caused by the presence of tapeworms from the Taenia genus, such as the pork tapeworm (Taenia solium) or the beef tapeworm (Taenia saginata).

Treatment Effective treatment of tapeworm infections involves administering compounds that are toxic to the adult worm. Many of the early treatments were also somewhat toxic to the patient, so treatment was often quite an ordeal. Newer medications are much more easily tolerated and are highly effective in eliminating the parasite from the body. One treatment that has been in use since the early 1960s is niclosamide (Niclocide). This drug is poorly absorbed from the digestive tract and rapidly kills tapeworms upon exposure. It has been shown to be effective against Taenia species and the fish tapeworm, but treatment of the dwarf tapeworm (Hymenolepis nana) may require a more prolonged treatment schedule. Side effects reported with niclosamide are infrequent and typically mild. When present, side effects may include nausea, abdominal discomfort, vomiting, diarrhea, lightGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Another oral medication that has been shown to be 95% effective in the treatment of tapeworm infections associated with both Taenia and Diphyllobothrium latum species is praziquantel (Biltricide). Side effects reported for praziquantel are mild and appear to be short-lived. They include nausea, abdominal pain, itching, sore joints, and muscle pain. It is recommended that follow-up stool samples be examined at one month and three months after treatment has been completed. Treatment can be considered successful if no eggs are present in several stool samples. It should be noted that the tapeworm medications do not kill the tapeworm eggs when they kill the adult worm, so the potential for infection with eggs still exists as the dead worm segments are passed. Proper personal hygiene in individuals receiving treatment will greatly reduce this potential. Cases of neurocysticercosis, where larvae have developed in the central nervous system, may also be treated with praziquantel or albendazole. If the patient is treated promptly, damage to the central nervous system will be minimized.

Prognosis When confined to the intestinal tract, tapeworms cause minimal damage to their human host. Once the diagnosis of an intestinal tapeworm infection has been made, prognosis following treatment with niclosamide or praziquantel is good. The worms can be eliminated from the intestines with oral treatment, and there are usually no residual side effects. Serious problems from tapeworm infections occur when tapeworm eggs are consumed and the larvae localize in tissues outside the digestive tract (cysticercosis). Prompt diagnosis and treatment of this condition is necessary to prevent permanent damage to the central nervous system and other internal organs. Untreated cases of cysticercosis have the rare potential to be life-threatening.

Prevention The best way to prevent infection with tapeworms is to eliminate the exposure of livestock to the tapeworm eggs by properly disposing of human feces. The next best strategy is to thoroughly cook or freeze all meat and fish before it is eaten to prevent consumption 3241

Tapeworm diseases

KEY TERMS

headedness, and skin rash. This medication should be taken in the morning on an empty stomach. The tablets are chewed thoroughly and swallowed with water. For young children, the tablets may be pulverized and mixed with water. Patients are allowed to eat two hours after treatment. Recommended dosage is 2 grams for adults and about half this for children.

Tardive dyskinesia

of live tapeworm larvae in infected samples. Larval cysts in pork and beef are killed by moderate temperatures of 150°F (65°C) or if frozen for at least 12 hours. Proper cooking of freshwater fish could also eliminate the possibility of human infection with the fish tapeworm. Freezing fresh fish for 24 hours will also kill the larval form.

Causes and symptoms TD usually appears after years of antipsychotic drug use, and seems to be related to the total lifetime dose of medication. The symptoms include the following: • tongue protrusion • grimacing • rapid eye blinking

Resources

• lip smacking, pursing, or puckering

PERIODICALS

Despommier, Dickson D. “Tapeworm Infection: The Long and the Short of It.” New England Journal of Medicine 327 (3 Sept. 1992): 727-728. Pearson, Richard D., and Erik L. Hewlett. “Niclosamide Therapy for Tapeworm Infections.” Annals of Internal Medicine 102 (Apr. 1985): 550-551. Schantz, Peter M. “Tapeworms (Cestodiasis).” Gastroenterology Clinics of North America 25 (Sept. 1996): 637-653. Schantz, Peter M., et al. “Neurocysticercosis in an Orthodox Jewish Community in New York City.” New England Journal of Medicine 327 (3 Sept. 1992): 692-695. Tanowitz, Herbert B., Louis M. Weiss and Murray Wittner. “Diagnosis and Treatment of Intestinal Helminths: Common Intestinal Cestodes.” The Gastroenterologist 1 (Dec. 1993): 265-273.

Geoffrey N. Clark, DVM

Tardive dyskinesia Definition Tardive dyskinesia is a mostly irreversible neurological disorder of involuntary movements caused by longterm use of antipsychotic or neuroleptic drugs.

Description Antipsychotic or neuroleptic drugs are powerful tranquilizers generally prescribed for serious psychiatric disorders, as well as neurological and gastrointestinal disorders. Some common antipsychotics are: chlorpromazine HCl (Thorazine), thioridazine HCl (Mellaril), haloperidol (Haldol), perphenazine (Trilafon), thiothixene (Navane), trifluoperazine HCl (Stelazine), and fluphenazine HCl (Permitil, Prolixin). When these drugs are used long term, tardive dyskinesia (TD) can result. About 20 percent of people taking antipsychotic drugs for more then one year become affected by TD. The prevalence of TD tends to be highest among elderly patients and among women. 3242

• rapid movement of the arms or legs • other involuntary movements of the head, face, neck and tongue muscles

Diagnosis The diagnosis of TD is suspected upon observation of involuntary movements of the head, neck, face, and tongue in individuals who have a history of antipsychotic drug prescription.

Treatment There is no standard treatment for TD. The primary approach is to discontinue or minimize the use of antipsychotic drugs while attempting to treat some of the symptoms. The treatment must be individualized to the patient, because discontinuation of the antipsychotic drug(s) may not be advisable, depending on the patient’s condition. In some cases, substituting another drug for the antipsychotic drug may be beneficial.

Prognosis Once TD appears in full-blown form, it can be permanent. With careful management, some symptoms may improve and even disappear with time. In less severe cases, some patients may recover from TD within three months of discontinuing the use of antipsychotic medication. Studies report that at least half of patients experience remission of major symptoms within 12 to 18 months following discontinuation of antipsychotic drugs. In some patients, however, decreasing the dose of the antipsychotic drug actually increases the symptoms of TD, while increasing the dose sometimes offers a temporary remission of the symptoms.

Prevention TD can be prevented by early recognition and discontinuation of the antipsychotic medication if this is clinically possible. The use of antipsychotic drugs should in any case be kept to a minimum in all patients. Patients should be followed carefully to determine when GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Antipsychotics—Drugs used to treat psychotic conditions such as schizophrenia or psychosis. These medications are powerful tranquilizers that all have sedating and calming effects, but their major effect is to reduce psychotic thinking and behavior. Neuroleptics—Any of a class of drugs used to treat psychotic conditions. Psychosis—A condition where a person’s ability to recognize reality and cope with everyday life is severely affected.

the dose of the drug can be tapered off as the psychiatric condition improves. In all cases, the benefits of taking the antipsychotic medication should outweigh the risk of developing TD. A study has shown that elderly institutionalized patients with dementia that were treated with risperidone had a low incidence of TD. Although further study is needed, this study shows that non-conventional neuroleptic drugs should be considered to avoid the risk of tardive dyskinesia, particularly in elderly patients. Resources

The eye needs a lid to protect it. It also needs tears and periodic blinking to cleanse it and keep it moist. There are many conditions that impair these functions and threaten the eye, specifically the cornea, with drying. Until they can be corrected, sewing the eyelids partially together helps protect the eye. A partial list of the conditions that can require tarsorrhaphy includes: • Paralysis or weakness of the eyelids so that they cannot close or blink adequately. Bell’s palsy is a nerve condition that weakens the muscles of the face, including the eyelids. It is usually temporary. Myasthenia gravis also weakens facial muscles, but it is usually treatable. A stroke can also weaken eyelids so they do not close. • Exophthalmos (the eyes sticking out of their sockets) occurs with Graves’ disease of the thyroid and with tumors behind the eyes. If the eyes stick out too far, the lids cannot close over them. • Enophthalmos is a condition in which the eye falls back into the socket so that the eyelid function is inadequate. • Several eye and corneal diseases cause swelling of the cornea and require temporary added protection until the condition resolves. • Sjögren’s syndrome reduces tear flow to the point where it can endanger the cornea. • Dendritic ulcers of the cornea caused by viruses may need to be covered with the eyelid while they heal.

BOOKS

Tasman, Allan. Psychiatry. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company, 1997. Tierney, Lawrence, et al. Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment. Los Altos: Lange Medical Publications, 2001. PERIODICALS

“Risperidone May Lower Incidence of TD.” Brown University geroPsych Report (August 2000):2. ORGANIZATIONS

National Institute for Mental Health. 6001 Executive Blvd., Room 8184, MSC 9663, Bethesda, MD 20892-9663. . Tardive Dyskinesia/Tardive Dystonia National Association. P.O. Box 45732, Seattle, WA 98145-0732. (206) 522-3166.

Precautions The use of eye drops and contact lenses to moisten and protect the eyes must be considered first before tarsorrhaphy is performed.

Description Stitches are carefully placed at the corners of the eyelid opening (called the palpebral fissure) to narrow it. This allows the eye better lubrication and less exposure to the air. Eyeball motion can then help bathe the cornea in tears when it rolls up under the lid. The outpatient procedure is done under local anesthetic.

Preparation

Tarsorrhaphy Definition Tarsorrhaphy is a rare procedure where the eyelids are partially sewn together to narrow the opening. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tarsorrhaphy is a minor procedure done under local anesthesia. Special preparation is not necessary.

Aftercare Eye drops or ointment may still be needed to preserve the cornea or treat accompanying disease. 3243

Tarsorrhaphy

Purpose

Tay-Sachs disease

KEY TERMS Cornea—The clear part of the front of the eye through which vision occurs. Enophthalmos—A condition in which the eye falls back into the socket and inhibits proper eyelid function. Exophthalmos—A condition in which the eyes stick out of their sockets and inhibit proper eyelid function. Palpebral fissure—Eyelid opening. Sjögren’s syndrome—A connective tissue disease that hinders the production of tears and other body fluids.

Risks Tarsorrhaphy carries few risks. If complications occur, they are usually minor eyelid swelling and superficial infection. Resources BOOKS

Sardegna, Jill Otis, and T. Paul. The Encyclopedia of Blindness and Vision Impairment. New York: Facts on File Inc., 1990.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Tattoos see Piercing and tattoos

Tay-Sachs disease Definition Tay-Sachs disease is a genetic disorder caused by a missing enzyme that results in the accumulation of a fatty substance in the nervous system. This results in disability and death.

Description Gangliosides are fatty substances necessary for the proper development of the brain and nerve cells (nervous system). Under normal conditions, gangliosides are continuously broken down, so that an appropriate balance is maintained. In Tay-Sachs disease, the enzyme necessary for removing excess gangliosides is missing. This allows 3244

gangliosides to accumulate throughout the brain, and is responsible for the disability associated with the disease. Tay-Sachs disease is particularly common among Jewish people of Eastern European and Russian (Ashkenazi) origin. About one out of every 3,600 babies born to Ashkenazi Jewish couples will have the disease. TaySachs is also more common among certain French-Canadian and Cajun French families.

Causes and symptoms Tay-Sachs is caused by a defective gene. Genes are located on chromosomes, and serve to direct specific development/processes within the body. The genetic defect in Tay-Sachs disease results in the lack of an enzyme called hexosaminidase A. Without this enzyme, gangliosides cannot be degraded. They build up within the brain, interfering with nerve functioning. Because Tay-Sachs is a recessive disorder, only people who receive two defective genes (one from the mother and one from the father) will actually have the disease. People who have only one defective gene and one normal gene are called carriers. They carry the defective gene and thus the possibility of passing the gene and/or the disease onto their offspring. When a carrier and a non-carrier have children, none of their children will actually have Tay-Sachs. It is likely that 50% of their children will be carriers themselves. When two carriers have children, their children have a 25% chance of having normal genes, a 50% chance of being carriers of the defective gene, and a 25% chance of having two defective genes. The two defective genes cause the disease itself. Classic Tay-Sachs disease strikes infants around the age of six months. Up until this age, the baby will appear to be developing normally. When Tay-Sachs begins to show itself, the baby will stop interacting with other people and develop a staring gaze. Normal levels of noise will startle the baby to an abnormal degree. By about one year of age, the baby will have very weak, floppy muscles, and may be completely blind. The head will be quite large. Patients also present with loss of peripheral (side) vision, inability to breath and swallow, and paralysis as the disorder progresses. Seizures become a problem between ages one and two, and the baby usually dies by about age four. A few variations from this classical progression of Tay-Sachs disease are possible: • Juvenile hexosaminidase A deficiency. Symptoms appear between ages two and five; the disease progresses more slowly, with death by about 15 years. • Chronic hexosaminidase A deficiency. Symptoms may begin around age five, or may not occur until age GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Technetium heart scan

KEY TERMS Ganglioside—A fatty (lipid) substance found within the brain and nerve cells.

20–30. The disease is milder. Speech becomes slurred. The individual may have difficulty walking due to weakness, muscle cramps, and decreased coordination of movements. Some individuals develop mental illness. Many have changes in intellect, hearing, or vision.

Diagnosis Examination of the eyes of a child with Tay-Sachs disease will reveal a characteristic cherry-red spot at the back of the eye (in an area called the retina). Tests to determine the presence and quantity of hexosaminidase A can be performed on the blood, specially treated skin cells, or white blood cells. A carrier will have about half of the normal level of hexosaminidase A present, while a patient with the disease will have none.

Treatment There is no treatment for Tay-Sachs disease.

Prognosis Sadly, the prognosis for a child with classic TaySachs disease is certain death. Because the chronic form of Tay-Sachs has been discovered recently, prognosis for this type of the disease is not completely known.

Section of brain tissue from patient with Tay-Sachs disease. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

PERIODICALS

Motulsky, Arno G. “Screening for Genetic Disease.” New England Journal of Medicine, 336, no. 18 (May 1, 1997): 1314+. Rosebush, Patricia I. “Late-Onset Tay-Sachs Disease Presenting as Catatonic Schizophrenia: Diagnostic and Treatment Issues.” Journal of the American Medical Association 274, no. 22 (December 13, 1995): 1744. ORGANIZATIONS

Late Onset Tay-Sachs Foundation. 1303 Paper Mill Road, Erdenheim, PA 19038. (800) 672-2022. March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. National Office. 1275 Mamaroneck Avenue, White Plains, NY 10605. (888) 663-4637. . . National Tay-Sachs and Allied Diseases Association, Inc. 2001 Beacon Street, Suite 204, Brighton, MA 02146. (800) 906-8723. Fax: 617-277-0134. . .

Prevention Prevention involves identifying carriers of the disease and providing them with appropriate information concerning the chance of their offspring having TaySachs disease. When the levels of hexosaminidase A are half the normal level, a person is a carrier of the defective gene. Blood tests of carriers reveals reduction of hexosaminidase A. When a woman is already pregnant, tests can be performed on either the cells of the baby (aminocentesis) or the placenta (chorionic villus sampling) to determine whether the baby will have Tay-Sachs disease. Resources BOOKS

Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, edited by Richard Behrman. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1996. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Laith Farid Gulli, MD

TB see Tuberculosis T-cell count see Lymphocyte typing TCM see Traditional Chinese medicine TE fistula see Tracheoesophageal fistula

Technetium heart scan Definition The technetium heart scan is a noninvasive nuclear scan that uses a radioactive isotope called technetium to evaluate blood flow after a heart attack. 3245

Technetium heart scan

Purpose The technetium heart scan is used to evaluate the heart after a heart attack. It can confirm that a patient had a heart attack when the symptoms and pain usually associated with a heart attack were not present; identify the size and location of the heart attack; and provide information useful in determining the patient’s post-heart attack prognosis. The scan is most useful when the electrocardiogram and cardiac enzyme studies do not provide definitive results—after heart surgery, for example, or when chest pain occurred more than 48 hours before the patient was examined. It is also used to evaluate the heart before and after heart surgery.

Precautions Pregnant women and those who are breastfeeding should not be exposed to technetium.

Description The technetium heart scan is a nuclear heart scan, which means that it involves the use of a radioactive isotope that targets the heart, and a radionuclide detector that traces the absorption of the radioactive isotope. The isotope is injected into a vein and absorbed by healthy tissue at a known rate during a certain time period. The radionuclide detector, in this case a gamma scintillation camera, picks up the gamma rays emitted by the isotope. The technetium heart scan uses technetium Tc-99m stannous pyrophosphate (usually called technetium), a mildly radioactive isotope that binds to calcium. After a heart attack, tiny calcium deposits appear on diseased heart valves and damaged heart tissue. These deposits appear within 12 hours of the heart attack. They are generally seen two to three days after the heart attack and are usually gone within one to two weeks. In some patients, they can be seen for several months. After the technetium is injected into a blood vessel in the arm, it accumulates in heart tissue that has been damaged, leaving “hot spots” that can be detected by the scintillation camera. The technetium heart scan provides better image quality than commonly used radioactive agents such as thallium, because it has a shorter half-life and can thus be given in larger doses. During the test, the patient lies motionless on the test table. Electrocardiogram electrodes are placed on the patient’s body for continuous monitoring during the test. The test table is rotated so that different views of the heart can be scanned. The camera, which looks like an xray machine and is suspended above the table, moves back and forth over the patient. It displays a series of 3246

images of technetium’s movement through the heart and records them on a computer for later analysis. The test is usually performed at least 12 hours after a suspected heart attack, but it can also be done during triage of a patient who goes to a hospital emergency room with chest pain but does not appear to have had a heart attack. Recent clinical studies demonstrate that technetium heart scans are very accurate in detecting heart attacks while the patient is experiencing chest pain. They are far more accurate than electrocardiogram findings. The technetium heart scan is usually performed in a hospital’s nuclear medicine department but it can be done at the patient’s bedside during a heart attack if the equipment is available. The scan is done two to three hours after the technetium is injected. Scans are usually done with the patient in several positions, with each scan taking 10 minutes. The entire test takes about 30 minutes to an hour. The scan is usually repeated over several weeks to determine if any further damage has been done to the heart. The test is also called technetium 99m pyrophosphate scintigraphy, hot-spot myocardial imaging, infarct avid imaging, or myocardial infarction scan. The technetium heart scan is not dangerous. The technetium is completely gone from the body within a few days of the test. The scan itself exposes the patient to about the same amount of radiation as a chest x ray. The patient can resume normal activities immediately after the test.

Preparation Two to three hours before the scan, technetium is injected into a vein in the patient’s forearm.

Normal results If the technetium heart scan is normal, no technetium will show up in the heart.

Abnormal results In an abnormal technetium heart scan, hot spots reveal damage to the heart. The larger the hot spots, the poorer the patient’s prognosis. Resources BOOKS

DeBakey, Michael E., and Antonio M. Gotto Jr. “Noninvasive Diagnostic Procedures.” In The New Living Heart. Holbrook, MA: Adams Media Corporation, 1997. Iskandrian, A. S., and Mario S. Verani. “Instrumentation and Technical Considerations in Planar and SPECT Imaging.” In Nuclear Cardiac Imaging: Principles and Applications. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis, 1996. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Electrocardiogram—A test in which electronic sensors called electrodes are placed on the body to record the heart’s electrical activities. Noninvasive—A procedure that does not penetrate the body. Radioactive isotope—One of two or more atoms with the same number of protons but a different number of neutrons with a nuclear composition. In nuclear scanning, radioactive isotopes are used as a diagnostic agent. Technetium—A radioactive isotope frequently used in radionuclide scanning of the heart and other organs. It is produced during nuclear fission reactions.

Sandler, M. P., et.al. “Radiopharmaceuticals.” In Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine. 3rd ed. Vol. 1. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1996. PERIODICALS

Kim, Samuel C., et. al. “Role of Nuclear Cardiology in the Evaluation of Acute Coronary Syndromes.” Annals of Emergency Medicine 30, no. 2 (Aug. 1997): 210-218. ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. . Texas Heart Institute. Heart Information Service. P.O. Box 20345, Houston, TX 77225-0345. .

Lori De Milto

TEE see Transesophageal echocardiography Template bleeding time see Bleeding time

Temporal arteritis Definition The term temporal arteritis literally means “inflammation of the temporal arteries.”As implied by the name, these blood vessels run along the temples after they branch off from the carotid artery in the neck. They provide the blood supply to portions of the scalp, jaw muscles, and salivary glands. Inflammation of these arteries, probably resulting from an abnormal immune reaction, GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Temporal arteritis is also called giant cell arteritis or cranial arteritis. It is a rheumatic disease that affects large and medium-sized arteries throughout the body and can occur in a variety of patients. Although the temporal arteries are most commonly affected, other arteries throughout the body may be affected. The disease seems to target arteries containing elastic tissue. Veins are rarely affected. Temporal arteritis is a type of vasculitis.

Description Temporal arteritis almost always occurs in people over 50, and it becomes more common as people age. About 20 out of 100,000 people over the age of 50 suffer from temporal arteritis. Women are affected twice as often as men. Some authorities say that temporal arteritis is more common in Caucasians (especially Scandinavians) than in people of other races. Close relatives of patients with temporal arteritis may be more likely than others to get the disease. Patients with temporal arteritis are diagnosed and overlap with a broader disorder called giant cell arteritis. This can affect parts of the body in addition to the scalp, eyes, and jaw. Sometimes the disease can cause restricted circulation to both arms or both legs, producing pain in the affected limbs. With other blood vessels involved, patients with advanced forms of the disease may experience strokes or transient ischemic attacks (TIA). These result in brief episodes of pain caused by decreased blood flow. Even heart attacks are occasionally caused by giant cell arteritis.

Causes and symptoms This disease is one of a group of diseases in which the linings of large- or medium-sized blood vessels become inflamed. The elastic layer of these vessels is attacked by “giant” cells and chemicals produced by the immune system. This reaction reduces blood flow through the blood vessels, and the limited blood supply causes the symptoms. The disease usually begins with “flu-like” symptoms, including a mild fever (100–101°F), general body discomfort, and a persistent, dull headache. The scalp may be tender to the touch over the affected blood vessels. Jaw muscles sometimes become painful when the patient chews. As the disease progresses, more severe symptoms occur. These include blurred vision or temporary blindness that typically lasts ten minutes or less. Eventually, permanent loss of vision can occur. Transient ischemic 3247

Temporal arteritis

KEY TERMS

disrupts this blood supply, resulting in a variety of symptoms. They can range from relatively minor—jaw pain or headache—through major— including temporary or permanent blindness.

Temporal arteritis

attacks, strokes, and heart attacks may occur when the disease is far advanced.

Diagnosis Doctors from a number of specialties develop experience in diagnosing and treating temporal arteritis. These include internists, who treat a broad range of diseases; rheumatologists, who focus on rheumatic diseases; geriatricians, who treat older people; ophthalmologists, who treat eye and vision disorders; neurologists, who treat headaches and problems of the optic nerve; and vascular surgeons, who treat blood vessel problems. The doctor will generally take a medical history first. The patient can help the doctor tremendously by reviewing all symptoms—both major and minor—from the last two or three months. If possible, the patient should ask family or close friends for help in recalling his/her ailments from recent months. Then the doctor will conduct a complete physical examination. Often, he or she will detect a tender, swollen artery on the scalp. The doctor will order blood tests as well. A standard and inexpensive test called the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR or “sed” rate) is particularly helpful. Results from this test, which measures inflammation in the body, will almost always be higher than normal. Tests of the red blood cells may show mild anemia. Sometimes blood tests for liver function will also be abnormal. The definitive diagnostic test is a temporal artery biopsy. A doctor will make one or more tiny incisions under local anesthesia to remove samples of the suspect artery. Under the microscope, a pathologist usually can identify the typical damage caused by temporal arteritis.

Treatment The mainstay of treatment is a course of corticosteroids (steroid hormones that have an anti-inflammatory effect), usually prednisone. The initial prescription involves a fairly high dose of steroids (40–60 mg/day) which is gradually tapered down to a maintenance dose. Because of the high incidence of blindness in untreated cases, steroid therapy should be started immediately rather than waiting for biopsy results. Patients typically take this maintenance dose for periods of one to three years. Sometimes nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are prescribed for muscle aches or headaches, especially while steroid doses are being reduced.

Prognosis The outlook for most patients with temporal arteritis is good, especially if the disorder is diagnosed early. Symptoms often diminish within a month once patients begin to take steroids. Although physicians do not talk 3248

KEY TERMS Anemia—Lower than normal level of red blood cells, or of the oxygen-carrying chemical hemoglobin. Biopsy—Removal and examination of a sample tissue from the body for diagnostic purposes. Corticosteroids—A group of hormones, produced naturally by the adrenal gland and other organs. They are used to treat a wide variety of disorders, including many rheumatic disorders. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate—The speed at which red blood cells sink in a tube of freshly drawn blood, which is a rough measure of clotting disorders or inflammation. Prednisone—A corticosteroid often used to treat inflammation. Rheumatic disease—A type of disease involving inflammation of muscles, joints, and other tissues. Transient ischemic attack—A brief experience of stroke-like symptoms (for instance, numbness, paralysis, problems in speaking or understanding speech) that go away within hours, with no permanent damage. Also known as TIA. Vasculitis—An inflammation of the blood vessels.

about a “cure” for temporal arteritis, symptoms typically do not return after a full course of steroid treatment. Unfortunately, if the diagnosis is made late in the disease, lost vision may not return.

Prevention There is no medically proven approach to prevention. The best way to prevent severe, permanent damage is to obtain expert medical advice if the patient or the family physician suspects this problem. Resources BOOKS

Diamond, Seymour, and David Dalessio. The Practicing Physician’s Guide to Headache. 5th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1992. PERIODICALS

Hayreh, S. S., et al. “Giant Cell Arteritis: Validity of Reliability of Various Diagnostic Criteria.” American Journal of Ophthalmology 123, no. 3 (1997): 285-296. Perkins, A. T., and W. Ondo.”When to Worry About Headache.” Postgraduate Medicine 98, no. 2 (1995): 197-205. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

National Headache Foundation. 428 W. St. James Place, Chicago, IL 60614. (800) 843-2256. .

Richard H. Lampert

Temporomandibular joint disorders Definition Temporomandibular joint disorder (TMJ) is the name given to a group of symptoms that cause pain in the head, face, and jaw. The symptoms include headaches, soreness in the chewing muscles, and clicking or stiffness of the joints. They often have psychological as well as physical causes.

Description TMJ disorder, which is also sometimes called TMJ syndrome, results from pressure on the facial nerves due to muscle tension or abnormalities of the bones in the area of the hinge joint between the lower jaw and the temporal bone. This hinge joint is called the temporomandibular joint. There are two temporomandibular joints, one on each side of the skull just in front of the ear. The name of the joint comes from the two bones that make it up. The temporal bone is the name of the section of the skull bones where the jaw bone (the mandible) is connected. The jaw bone is held in place by a combination of ligaments, tendons, and muscles. The temporomandibular joint also contains a piece of cartilage called a disc, which keeps the temporal bone and the jaw bone from rubbing against each other. The jaw pivots at the joint area in front of the ear. The pivoting motion of the jaw is complicated because it can move downward and from side to side as well as forward. Anything that causes a change in shape or functioning of the temporomandibular joint will cause pain and other symptoms.

Causes and symptoms Causes TMJ syndrome has several possible physical causes: • Muscle tension. Muscle tightness in the temporomandibular joint usually results from overuse of muscles. This overuse in turn is often associated with psychological stress and clenching or grinding of the teeth (bruxism). • Injury. A direct blow to the jaw or the side of the head can result in bone fracture, soft tissue bruising, or a dislocation of the temporomandibular joint itself. • Arthritis. Both osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis can cause TMJ. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• Internal derangement. Internal derangement is a condition in which the cartilage disk lies in front of its proper position. In most cases of internal derangement, the disc moves in and out of its correct location, making a clicking or popping noise as it moves. In a few cases, the disc is permanently out of position, and the patient’s range of motion in the jaw is limited. • Hypermobility. Hypermobility is a condition in which the ligaments that hold the jaw in place are too loose and the jaw tends to slip out of its socket. • Birth abnormalities. These are the least frequent cause of TMJ but do occur in a minority of patients. In some cases, the top of the jawbone is too small; in others, the top of the jawbone outgrows the lower part. Symptoms The symptoms of TMJ depend in part on its cause. The most common symptoms are facial pain in front of the ears; headaches; sore jaw muscles; a clicking sound when chewing; a grating sensation when opening and closing the mouth; and temporary locking of the jaw. Some patients also report a sensation of buzzing or ringing in the ears. Usually, the temporomandibular joint itself is not painful. Most cases of TMJ are seen in women between 20-50 years of age.

Diagnosis Dental examination and patient history TMJ disorders are most frequently diagnosed by dentists. The dentist can often diagnose TMJ based on physical examination of the patient’s face and jaw. The examination might include pressing on (palpating) the jaw muscles for soreness or asking the patient to open and close the jaw in order to check for misalignment of the teeth in the upper and lower jaw. This condition is called malocclusion. The dentist might also gently move the patient’s jaw in order to check for loose ligaments. Imaging studies Imaging studies are not usually necessary to diagnose TMJ. In most cases, x rays and MRI scans of the temporomandibular joint will be normal. Consequently, these two tests are not commonly used to diagnose TMJ. If the dentist suspects that the patient has internal derangement of the disc, he or she can use a technique called arthrography to make the diagnosis. In an arthrogram, a special dye is injected into the joint, which is then x-rayed. Arthrography can be used to evaluate the movement of the jaw and the disc as well as size and shape, and to evaluate the effectiveness of treatment for TMJ. 3249

Temporomandibular joint disorders

ORGANIZATIONS

Tendinitis

Physical therapy and mechanical devices

KEY TERMS Arthrography—An imaging technique that is sometimes used to evaluate TMJ associated with internal derangement. Bruxism—Habitual clenching and grinding of the teeth, especially during sleep. Electromyographic biofeedback—A method for relieving jaw tightness by monitoring the patient’s attempts to relax the muscle while the patient watches a gauge. The patient gradually learns to control the degree of muscle relaxation. Internal derangement—A condition in which the cartilage disc in the temporomandibular joint lies in front of its proper position. Malocclusion—The misalignment of opposing teeth in the upper and lower jaws. Mandible—The medical name for the lower jaw. Osteoarthritis—A type of arthritis marked by chronic degeneration of the cartilage of the joints, leading to pain and sometimes loss of function. Rheumatoid arthritis—A chronic autoimmune disorder marked by inflammation and deformity of the affected joints.

Patients who have difficulty with bruxism are usually treated with splints. A plastic splint called a nightguard is given to the patient to place over the teeth before going to bed. Splints can also be used to treat some cases of internal derangement by holding the jaw forward and keeping the disc in place until the ligaments tighten. The splint is adjusted over a period of two to four months. TMJ can also be treated with ultrasound, electromyographic biofeedback, stretching exercises, transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, stress management techniques, or friction massage. Surgery Surgery is ordinarily used only to treat TMJ caused by birth deformities or certain forms of internal derangement caused by misshapen discs. Prognosis The prognosis for recovery from TMJ is excellent for almost all patients. Most patients do not need any form of long-term treatment. Surgical procedures to treat TMJ are quite successful. In the case of patients with TMJ caused by arthritis or infectious diseases, the progression of the arthritis or the success of eliminating infectious agents determines whether TMJ can be eliminated.

Temporal bones—The compound bones that form the left and right sides of the skull.

Resources

Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation—A method for relieving the muscle pain of TMJ by stimulating nerve endings that do not transmit pain. It is thought that this stimulation blocks impulses from nerve endings that do transmit pain.

“Disorders of the Temporomandibular Joint.” In Merck Manual of Medical Information: Home Edition, ed. Robert Berkow, et al. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. Murphy Jr., William A., and Phoebe A. Kaplan, “Temporomandibular Joint.” In Diagnosis of Bone and Joint Disorders, ed. Donald Resnick. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1995.

BOOKS

John T. Lohr, PhD

Treatment In many cases, the cause of pain in the TMJ area is temporary and disappears without treatment. About 80% of patients with TMJ will improve in six months without medications or physical treatments.

TEN see Toxic epidermal necrolysis

Tendinitis Medications Patients with TMJ can be given muscle relaxants if their symptoms are related to muscle tension. Some patients may be given aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for minor discomfort. If the TMJ is related to rheumatoid arthritis, it may be treated with corticosteroids, methotrexate (MTX, Rheumatrex) or gold sodium (Myochrysine). 3250

Definition Tendinitis is the inflammation of a tendon, a tough rope-like tissue that connects muscle to bone.

Description Tendinitis usually occurs in individuals in middle or old age because it is often the result of overuse over a GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS

Tendons that commonly become inflamed include: • tendons of the hand

Biceps—The muscle in the front of the upper arm.

• tendons of the upper arm that effect the shoulder

Infraspinatus—A muscle at the middle of the shoulder blade.

• achilles tendon and the tendon that runs across the top of the foot

Supraspinatus—A muscle at the top of the shoulder blade.

Causes and symptoms Sudden stretching or repeated overuse injures the connection between the tendon and its bone or muscle. The injury is largely mechanical, but when it appears, the body tries to heal it by initiating inflammation. Inflammation increases the blood supply, bringing nutrients to the damaged tissues along with immunogenic agents to combat infection. The result is swelling, tenderness, pain, heat, and redness if the inflammation is close to the skin.

Diagnosis Some tendon injuries are superficial and easy to identify. These include “tennis elbow” (extensor tendinitis) over the outside of the elbow, and Achilles’ tendinitis just above the heel of the foot. There are several tendons in the shoulder that can be overused or stretched, and usually a shoulder will have more than one injury at a time. Tendinitis in the biceps, the infraspinatus, or the supraspinatus tendon may accompany a tear of the shoulder ligaments or an impingement of one bone on another. Careful pressure testing and movement of the parts is all that is necessary to identify the tendinitis.

Alternative treatment An osteopathic soft-tissue treatment on the tendon may relieve pain and increase mobility. Increasing intake of antioxidant-rich foods and lowering intake of animal fats may help reduce the inflammation. Acupuncture has also been used to combat tendinitis. Hydrotherapies, such as whirlpool baths, help relax the surrounding muscles.

Prognosis Generally, tendinitis will heal if the provoking activity is stopped.

Prevention If given enough time, tendons will strengthen to meet the demands placed on them. They grow slowly because of their poor blood supply, so adequate time is required for good conditioning. Resources BOOKS

Treatment Rest, ice, compression, and elevation (RICE) will treat the acute condition. The best way to apply ice is in a bag with water. The water applies the cold directly to the skin. Chemical ice packs can get too cold and cause frostbite. Compression using an elastic wrap minimizes swelling and bleeding in an acute sprain. Splinting may help rest the limb. Pain and anti-inflammatory medications (aspirin, naproxen, ibuprofen) will help. Sometimes the inflammation lingers and requires additional treatment. Injections of cortisone-like medicine often relieve chronic tendinitis, but should be reserved for resistant cases since cortisone can occasionally cause problems of its own. If tendinitis is persistent and unresponsive to nonsurgical treatment, a surgery to remove the afflicted portion of tendon can be performed. Surgery is also conducted to remove calcium buildup that comes with persistent tendinitis. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Boulware, Dennis W. “The Painful Shoulder.” In Cecil Textbook of Medicine, ed. J. Claude Bennett and Fred Plum. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Gilliland, Bruce C. “Relapsing Polychondritis and Other Arthritides.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Tennis elbow Definition Tennis elbow is an inflammation of several structures of the elbow. These include muscles, tendons, bursa, periosteum, and epicondyle (bony projections on the outside and inside of the elbow, where muscles of the forearm attach to the bone of the upper arm). 3251

Tennis elbow

long period of time. Tendinitis does occur in younger patients as a result of acute overuse.

Tennis elbow

wrist and forearm movements for long periods of time may be prone to tennis elbow. This condition is also called epicondylitis, lateral epicondylitis, medial epicondylitis, or golfer’s elbow, where pain is present at the inside epicondyle.

Causes and symptoms Tennis elbow pain originates from a partial tear of the tendon and the attached covering of the bone. It is caused by chronic stress on tissues attaching forearm muscles to the elbow area. Individuals experiencing tennis elbow may complain of pain and tenderness over either of the two epicondyles. This pain increases with gripping or rotation of the wrist and forearm. If the condition becomes long-standing and chronic, a decrease in grip strength can develop.

Small tear in tendon tissue

Diagnosis

Epicondylitis

The classic tennis elbow is caused by repeated forceful contractions of wrist muscles located on the outer forearm. The stress created at a common muscle origin causes microscopic tears leading to inflammation. Persons who are most at risk of developing tennis elbow are those whose occupations requires strenuous or repetitive forearm movement. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

Description The classic tennis elbow is caused by repeated forceful contractions of wrist muscles located on the outer forearm. The stress, created at a common muscle origin, causes microscopic tears leading to inflammation. This is a relatively small surface area located at the outer portion of the elbow (the lateral epicondyle). Medial tennis elbow, or medial epicondylitis, is caused by forceful, repetitive contractions from muscles located on the inside of the forearm. All of the forearm muscles are involved in tennis serves, when combined motions of the elbow and wrist are employed. This overuse injury is common between ages 20 and 40. People at risk for tennis elbow are those in occupations that require strenuous or repetitive forearm movement. Such jobs include mechanics or carpentry. Sport activities that require individuals to twist the hand, wrist, and forearm, such as tennis, throwing a ball, bowling, golfing, and skiing, can cause tennis elbow. Individuals in poor physical condition, who are exposed to repetitive 3252

Diagnosis of tennis elbow includes the individual observation and recall of symptoms, a thorough medical history, and physical examination by a physician. Diagnostic testing is usually not necessary unless there may be evidence of nerve involvement from underlying causes. X rays are usually always negative because the condition primarily affects soft tissue, in contrast to a bony disorder.

Treatment Conservative Heat or ice is helpful in relieving tennis elbow pain. Once acute symptoms have subsided, heat treatments are used to increase blood circulation and promote healing. The physician may recommend physical therapy to apply diathermy or ultrasound to the inflamed site. These are two common modalities used to increase the temperature of the tissues in order to address both pain and inflammation. Occasionally, a tennis elbow splint may be useful to help decrease stress on the elbow throughout daily activities. Exercises become very important to improve flexibility to all forearm muscles, and will aid in decreasing muscle and tendon tightness that has been creating excessive pull at the common attachment of the epicondyle. The physician may also prescribe nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) to reduce inflammation and pain. Injections of cortisone or anesthetics are often used if physical therapy is ineffective. Cortisone reduces inflammation, and anesthetics temporarily relieve pain. Physicians are cautious regarding excessive number of injections as they have recently been found to weaken the tendon’s integrity. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Epicondyle—A projection on the surface of a bone; often an area for muscle and tendon attachment. Epicondylitis—A painful and sometimes disabling inflammation of the muscle and surrounding tissues of the elbow caused by repeated stress and strain on the forearm near the lateral epicondyle of the humerus (arm bone). Periosteum—A fibrous vascular membrane that covers bones.

Resources BOOKS

Hertling, Darlene, and Randolph M. Kessler. Management of Common Musculoskeletal Disorders: Physical Therapy Principles and Methods. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co., 1990. Norkin, Cynthia C., and Pamela K. Levangie. Joint Structure and Function: A Comprehensive Analysis. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis Co., 1992. ORGANIZATIONS

Surgery If conservative methods of treatment fail, surgical release of the tendon at the epicondyle may be a necessary form of treatment. However, surgical intervention is relatively rare.

American College of Sports Medicine. P.O. Box 1440, Indianapolis, IN 46206-1440. (317) 637-9200. .

Jeffrey P. Larson, RPT

TENS see Electrical nerve stimulation

Alternative treatment Massage therapy has been found to be beneficial if symptoms are mild. Massage techniques are based primarily on increasing circulation to promote efficient reduction of inflammation. Manipulation, acupuncture, and acupressure have been used as well. Contrast hydrotherapy (alternating hot and cold water or compresses, three minutes hot, 30 seconds cold, repeated three times, always ending with cold) applied to the elbow can help bring nutrient-rich blood to the joint and carry away waste products. Botanical medicine and homeopathy may also be effective therapies for tennis elbow. For example, cayenne (Capsicum frutescens) ointment or prickly ash (Zanthoxylum americanum) oil applied topically may help to increase blood flow to the affected area and speed healing.

Prognosis Tennis elbow is usually curable; however, if symptoms become chronic, it is not uncommon for treatment to continue for three to six months.

Prevention Until symptoms of pain and inflammation subside, activities requiring repetitive wrist and forearm motion should be avoided. Once pain decreases to the point that return to activity can begin, the playing of sports, such as tennis, for long periods should not occur until excellent condition returns. Many times, choosing a different size or type of tennis racquet may help. Frequent rest periods GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tensilon test Definition Tensilon is the trade name for edrophonium chloride. The Tensilon test is an injection of edrophonium chloride used to diagnosis myasthenia gravis (MG).

Purpose Tensilon blocks the action of an enzyme, acetylcholinesterase, an important part of the system regulating neuromuscular transmission. To stimulate a muscle, a nerve cell (neuron) releases the chemical acetylcholine. To prevent prolonged muscle response to a single nerve signal, acetylcholine is broken down by acetylcholinesterase after the muscle is stimulated. In myasthenia gravis, there are too few receptors for acetylcholine on the muscle. The acetylcholine is broken down before it can fully stimulate this reduced number of receptors, and, as a result, the muscle is weak. By blocking the action of acetylcholinesterase, Tensilon prolongs the muscle stimulation, and temporarily improves strength. Increased strength following an injection of Tensilon strongly suggests a dignosis of MG. The Tensilon test is most effective when easily observed weakness is present, and is less useful for vague or fluctuating complaints. 3253

Tensilon test

KEY TERMS

are important despite what the wrist and forearm activity may be. Compliance with a stretching and strengthening program is very important in helping prevent recurring symptoms and exacerbation.

Tension headache

Resources

KEY TERMS Acetylcholine—a molecule released by neurons at the neuromuscular junction that causes muscle contraction.

ORGANIZATIONS

Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America. 222 S. Riverside Plaza, Suite 1540, Chicago, IL 60606. (800) 541-5454. . Muscular Dystrophy Association. 3300 East Sunrise Drive, Tucson, AZ 85718. (800) 572-1717. .

Richard Robinson

Precautions The Tensilon test may cause heart rhythm abnormalities, especially in those patients with preexisting conditions.

Tension headache Description The Tensilon test involves the intravenous injection of a small amount of Tensilon. The needle is left in place. If no adverse reaction is observed within 30 seconds, an additional volume is injected. Results are apparent within one minute.

Preparation Before the test, the patient must stop taking all drugs that can inhibit acetylcholinesterase. The referring physician can advise on specific drugs the patient is taking.

Aftercare The effects of Tensilon subside quickly, and are completely gone after 30-60 minutes. No aftercare is needed.

Risks Atrial fibrillation and bradycardia are possible in sensitive individuals. The administering physician must have appropriate resuscitative equipment available.

Normal results In a patient without MG, the Tensilon test will not produce an obvious increase in a previously weak muscle. Some subjective feelings of increased strength are possible but not significant.

Abnormal results An obvious increase in strength in weakened muscles strongly suggests the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis. The effect comes on very rapidly, and fades within minutes. 3254

Definition This most common type of headache is caused by severe muscle contractions triggered by stress or exertion. It affects as many as 90% of adult Americans.

Description While most American adults get a tension headache from time to time, women and people with more education are slightly more likely to suffer with them. People who are so anxious that they grind their teeth or hunch their shoulders may find that the physical strain in their body can be experienced as pain and tension in the muscles of the neck and scalp, producing almost constant pain.

Causes and symptoms Tension headaches are caused by tightening in the muscles of the face, neck and scalp because of stress or poor posture. They can last for days or weeks and can cause pain of varying intensity. The tightening muscles cause more expansion and constriction of blood vessels, which can make head pain worse. Eyestrain caused by dealing with a large amount of paperwork or reading can cause a tension headache as well. Many people report tension headache pain as a kind of steady ache (as opposed to a throb) that forms a tight band around the forehead, affecting both sides of the head. Tension headaches usually occur in the front of the head, although they also may appear at the top or the back of the skull. Tension headaches often begin in late afternoon and can last for several hours; they can occur every day and last throughout most of the day. When this happens, the headache is called a chronic tension headache. Unlike migraines, tension headaches don’t cause nausea and vomiting, sensitivity to light, or any kind of aura before the headache begins. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Diagnosis of tension headaches is made from a medical history, discussion of symptoms, and elimination of other types of headaches or underlying disorders.

Tension headache

Diagnosis Muscles

Very few headaches are the sign of a serious underlying medical problem. However, sufferers should call a physician at once if they: • have more than three headaches a week • take painkillers almost every day • need more than the recommended dose of painkiller • have a stiff neck and/or fever in addition to headache

Areas of pain

• are dizzy, unsteady, or have slurred speech, weakness, or numbness • have confusion or drowsiness with the headache • have headaches that began with a head injury

Tension Headache

• have headaches triggered by bending, coughing or exertion • have headaches that keep getting worse • have severe vomiting with the headache • had the first headache after age 50 • awaken with headache that gets better as the day goes on

Treatment There are many different treatments for tension headaches, which respond well to both medication and massage. If these headaches become chronic, however, they are best treated by identifying the source of tension and stress and reducing or eliminating it.

Tension headache is the most common type of headache, caused by severe muscle contractions triggered by stress or exertion. Tension headaches usually occur in the front of the head, although they may also appear at the top or the back of the skull, as shown in the illustration above. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

area. In fact, relaxing the muscles of the neck can cut the intensity and duration of tension headaches at least in half. To relax these muscles, the neck should be rotated from side to side as the shoulders shrug. Some people find that imagining a sense of warmth or heaviness in the neck muscles can help. Taking three very deep breaths at the first hint of tension can help prevent a headache.

Medication Tension headaches usually respond very well to such over-the-counter medicines as aspirin, ibuprofen, or acetaminophen. However, some of these drugs (especially those that contain caffeine) may trigger rebound headaches if discontinued after they are taken for more than a few days. More severe tension headaches may require combination medications, including a mild sedative such as butalbital; these should be used sparingly, though. Chronic tension headaches may respond to low-dose amitriptyline taken at night. Massage Massaging the tense muscle groups may help ease pain. Instead of directly massaging the temple, patients will get more relief from rubbing the neck and shoulders, because tension headaches can arise from tension in this GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Other therapy If tension headaches are a symptom of either depression or anxiety, the underlying problem should be treated with counseling, medication, or a combination of both.

Alternative treatment Eliminating the source of the tension as much as possible will help prevent tension headaches. Acupuncture may be helpful in treating some chronic tension headaches. Homeopathic remedies and botanical medicine can also help relieve tension headaches. Valerian (Valeriana officinalis), skullcap (Scutellaria lateriflora), and passionflower (Passiflora incarnata) are three herbal remedies that may be helpful. A tension headache can also be relieved by soaking the feet in hot water while an ice cold towel is wrapped around the neck. 3255

Testicular cancer

Prognosis Cutting down on stress and relying less on caffeinecontaining medications can reduce the number of tension headaches for most people.

Prevention Tension headaches can often be prevented by managing everyday stress and making some important lifestyle changes. Those who are prone to tension headaches should: • take frequent “stress breaks” • get regular exercise—even a brisk 15-minute walk can help prevent tension headaches • get enough sleep • release angry feelings Resources BOOKS

Rapoport, Alan M., and Fred Sheftell. Headache Relief for Women. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.,1996. Robbins, Lawrence, and Susan S. Lang. Headache Help. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1995. Solomon, Seymour, and Steven Fraccaro. The Headache Book. New York: Consumer Reports Books, 1991. PERIODICALS

Byfield, Ted. “Sock It to Headache Pain.” Body Bulletin (1 Feb. 1996): 3. Kleiman, Carol. “For Women, Success at Work Can Be a Tension Headache.” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 2 Apr. 1998, C8. Munson, Marty, Therese Walsh, and Yun Lee. “On the Mark: Aim Low to Relieve Tension Headache.” Prevention Magazine, 1 Jan. 1996, 24-25. Rogers, June. “Your Aching Head.” Chatelaine 69 (1 Aug. 1996): 47-50. ORGANIZATIONS

Description The testicles make up one portion of the male reproductive system. Normally, they are each somewhat smaller than a golf ball in size and are contained within the scrotum. The testicles are a man’s primary source of male hormones, particularly testosterone. They also produce sperm. There are several types of cells contained in the testicles, and any of these may develop into one or more types of cancer. Over 90% of all testicular cancers begin in cells called germ cells. There are two main types of germ cell tumors in men: seminomas and nonseminomas. Seminomas make up about 40% of all testicular germ cell tumors. Nonseminomas make up a group of cancers, which include choriocarcinoma, yolk sac tumors, embryonal carcinoma, and teratoma. Although testicular cancer accounts for less then 2% of all cancers in men, it is the most commonly seen cancer in young men aged 15 to 35. It is also one of the most curable. The American Cancer Society estimates that approximately 7,200 new cases of testicular cancer will be diagnosed in 2001. In addition, about 400 men will die of the disease during that year. Though the incidence of testicular cancer is rising, having doubled in the last 30 years, it is still rare. Scandinavian countries have the highest rate in the world. Germany and New Zealand also have high rates. The lowest incidences of testicular cancer are in Asia and Africa.

Causes and symptoms

American Council for Headache Education (ACHE). 19 Mantua Road, Mt. Royal, NJ 08061. (800) 255-2243. . National Headache Foundation. 428 W. St. James Place, Chicago, IL 60614. (800) 843-2256. .

Carol A. Turkington

Terazosin see Alpha1-adrenergic blockers

Testicular cancer Definition Testicular cancer is a disease in which cancer cells are discovered in one or both testicles. The testicles, also 3256

known as testes or gonads, are located in a pouch beneath the penis called the scrotum.

The exact causes of testicular cancer are unknown. However, there is research showing that some men are more likely to acquire it than others. The risk for testicular cancer is much higher for boys born with one or both of their testicles located in the lower abdomen rather than in the scrotum. This condition is called cryptorchidism or undescended testicles. The lifetime risk of getting testicular cancer is four times higher for boys with cryptorchidism than the risk in the general population. This risk factor remains even if surgery is done to place the testicle back into the scrotum. There are other risk factors as well. Men who have had abnormal development of their testicles are at increased risk, as are men with Klinefelter’s syndrome (a disorder of the sex chromosomes). A family history of testicular cancer increases the possibility of getting the disease. Men infected with the human immunodeficienGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Testicular cancer

Penis

Site of cancer

Testicle Scrotum

A cancerous growth on the testicle. (Illustration by Argosy Inc.)

Diagnosis

cy virus (HIV), especially those with AIDS, have a higher incidence, as do infertile men. Certain testicular tumors appear more frequently among men who work in certain occupations, like miners, oil workers, and utility workers. There is no conclusive evidence that injuries to the testicles or environmental exposure to various chemicals cause the disease.

When a man exhibits symptoms that suggest a possibility of testicular cancer, several diagnostic steps will occur before a definitive diagnosis is made.

Testicular cancer usually shows no early symptoms. It is suspected when a mass or lump is felt in the testes, although a testicular mass does not always indicate cancer and is usually painless.

The physician takes a personal and family medical history and a complete physical examination is performed. The doctor will examine the scrotum as well as the abdomen and other areas to check for additional masses.

Symptoms: • a lump in either testicle (usually pea-sized, but may be as large as a marble or an egg) • any enlargement or significant shrinking of a testicle • a sensation of heaviness in the scrotum • a dull ache in the groin or lower abdomen • any sudden collection of fluid in the scrotum • tenderness or enlargement of the breasts • pain or discomfort in a testicle or in the scrotum GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

History and physical

Ultrasound If a mass is found, the physician will likely have an ultrasound performed. Through the use of sound waves, ultrasounds can help visualize internal organs and may be useful in telling the difference between fluid-filled cysts and solid masses. If the tumor is solid, it is most likely cancerous. Blood tests Certain blood tests can be helpful in diagnosing some testicular tumors. Tumor markers are substances 3257

Testicular cancer

often found in higher-than-normal amounts in cancer patients. Some testicular cancers secrete high levels of certain proteins such as alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG), and enzymes like lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). These markers may help find a tumor that is too small to be felt during a physical examination. In addition, these tests are also helpful in determining how much cancer is actually present, and in evaluating the response to treatment to make sure the tumor has not returned. Surgery If a suspicious growth is found, a surgeon will need to remove the tumor and send it to the laboratory for testing. A pathologist examines the testicular tissue microscopically to determine whether cancer cells are present. If cancer cells are found, the pathologist sends back a report describing the type and extent of the cancer. In almost all cases, the surgeon removes the entire affected testicle through an incision in the groin, though not through the scrotum. This procedure is called radical inguinal orchiectomy. Once testicular cancer is determined, further tests are necessary to find out if the cancer has metastasized (spread) to other parts of the body, and to ascertain the stage or extent of the disease. This information helps the doctor plan appropriate treatment. These tests may include computed tomography (CT scan), lymphangiography (x rays of the lymph system), bone scans, and chest x rays.

Treatment Staging One method the cancer treatment team uses to describe the scope of a patient’s cancer is the use of a staging system. Testicular cancer is classified using the TNM system. However, in order to simplify and summarize this information, the TNM description can be grouped according to stages.

• Recurrent. Recurrent disease indicates that the cancer has come back after it has already been treated. Testicular cancer can come back in the same testicle (if it was not surgically removed) or in some other body part. Treatment The treatment decisions for testicular cancer are dependent on the stage and cell type of the disease, as well as the patient’s age and overall health. The four kinds of treatment most commonly used are surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and bone marrow or stem cell transplantation. Surgery is normally the first line of treatment for testicular cancer and involves the removal of the affected testicle. This procedure is known as a radical inguinal orchiectomy. Depending on the type and stage of the cancer, some lymph nodes may also be removed at the same time, or possibly in a second operation. This procedure is called a retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, and can be a major operation. Some patients will experience temporary complications after surgery, including infections and bowel obstruction. If both of the testicles are taken out, a man will have no ability to produce sperm cells and will become infertile (unable to father a child). Surgery removing the lymph nodes may cause some damage to nearby nerves, which may interfere with the ability to ejaculate. Men undergoing surgery for testicular cancer may wish to discuss nerve-sparing surgery with their doctor, as well as sperm banking. Radiation therapy for testicular cancer is delivered from a machine and is known as external beam radiation. One potential problem with this type of radiation is that it can also destroy nearby healthy tissue as well as cancer cells. Other potential side effects include nausea, diarrhea and fatigue. A special device can be used to protect the unaffected testicle to preserve fertility.

• Stage I. This stage refers to a cancer found only in the testicle, with no spread to the lymph nodes or to distant organs.

Chemotherapy refers to the use of drugs in treating cancer. Since the drugs enter the bloodstream and circulate throughout the body, chemotherapy is considered a systemic treatment. The drugs primarily used in the treatment of testicular cancer are cisplatin, vinblastine, bleomycin, cyclophosphamide, etoposide, and ifosfamide. These drugs are given in various combinations, since the use of two or more drugs is considered more effective than using only one drug.

• Stage II. This indicates that the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes in the abdomen, but not to lymph nodes in other parts of the body.

Since chemotherapy agents can affect normal as well as cancerous cells, several side effects are possible. These side effects include:

• Stage III. In this stage, the cancer has spread beyond the lymph nodes in the abdomen, and/or the cancer is in parts of the body far away from the testicles, such as the lungs or the liver.

• nausea and vomiting

Stages of testicular cancer:

3258

• changes in appetite • hair loss (temporary) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• increased risk of infections • bleeding or bruising • fatigue • diarrhea or constipation Several drugs are available to assist in treating these side effects, most of which will disappear after the treatment is completed. However, some of the chemotherapy agents used during treatment of testicular cancer may cause long-term side effects. These include hearing loss, nerve damage, and possible kidney or lung damage. Another potentially serious long-term complication is an increased risk of leukemia. This is a rare side effect, however, as it occurs in less than 1% of testicular cancer patients who receive chemotherapy. Chemotherapy may also interfere with sperm production. This may be permanent for some, but many will regain their fertility within a few years. Studies are ongoing to determine whether high doses of chemotherapy combined with stem-cell transplantation will prove effective in treating some patients with advanced testicular cancer. In this treatment, bloodforming cells called stem cells are taken from the patient (either from the bone marrow or filtered out of the patient’s blood). These cells are kept frozen while highdose chemotherapy is administered. After receiving the chemotherapy, the patient is given the stem cells through an infusion. This treatment enables the use of extra large doses of chemotherapy that might increase the cure rate for some testicular cancers. Preferred treatment plans by stage of disease Stage I: Stage I seminomas are normally treated with a radical inguinal orchiectomy followed by radiation treatment aimed at the lymph nodes. More than 95% of Stage I seminomas are cured through this method. Another approach is to perform surgery only. Patients are then followed closely for several years with blood tests and imaging studies. If the cancer spreads later on, radiation or chemotherapy can still be used. Stage I non-seminomas are also highly curable with surgery, followed by one of three options. These options include the performance of a retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, two cycles of chemotherapy, or careful observation for several years. Stage II: Stage II seminomas and non-seminomas are cured in 90% to 95% of the cases. For the purposes of treatment, stage II testicular cancers are classified as either bulky or nonbulky. Nonbulky seminomas (no lymph nodes can be felt in the abdomen) are treated with an orchiectomy followed by radiation to the lymph nodes. Men with bulky seminomas have surgery, which may be followed by either radiation or a course of GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

chemotherapy. Nonbulky Stage II non-seminomas are treated with surgery and lymph node removal, with possible chemotherapy. Men with bulky disease have surgery followed by chemotherapy. Stage III: Stage III seminomas and non-seminomas are treated with surgery followed by chemotherapy. This produces a cure in about 70% of the cases. Those who are not cured may be eligible to participate in clinical trials of other chemotherapy agents. Recurrent: Treatment of recurrent testicular cancer is dependent upon the initial stage and the treatment given. This might include further surgery and chemotherapy. Many men whose disease comes back after chemotherapy are treated with high-dose chemotherapy followed by bone marrow or stem cell transplantation.

Alternative treatment There are currently no scientifically proven alternative treatments known for testicular cancer. Nothing has been shown to be as successful as conventional treatment. However, some patients may find certain alternative or complementary treatments supportive while undergoing surgery, chemotherapy or radiation. For example, meditation and relaxation exercises may prove effective in reducing nausea and vomiting. Some dietary modifications and nutritional supplements may be helpful in assisting with recovery after surgery. The testicular cancer patient considering alternative treatments should talk it over with members of the cancer care team. They may be able to offer additional information.

Prevention The main risk factors associated with testicular cancer—cryptorchidism, family history of the disease, and being Caucasian—are unavoidable since they are present at birth. In addition, many men diagnosed with the disease have no known risk factors. Because of these reasons, it is not possible to prevent most incidences of testicular cancer. Resources BOOKS

Nichols, Craig R., et al. “Neoplasms of the Testis.” In Cancer Medicine, 5th ed. Hamilton, Ontario: American Cancer Society, 2000. PERIODICALS

“Curable Cancer: Testicular Malignancies are Easy to Find and Treat. But You Have to be Willing to Probe a Bit.” Time 154 (September 6, 1999): 85. “Early Diagnosis is Key to Treatment.” USA Today Magazine 129 (October 2000): 10. 3259

Testicular cancer

• mouth sores

Testicular self-examination

Purpose

KEY TERMS Cryptorchidism—Occurs when a boy is born with one or both testicles in the lower abdomen rather than the scrotum. Known also as undescended testicles, it is the primary risk factor for testicular cancer. Metastatic testicular cancer—Testicular cancer that has spread to other parts of the body. Radical inguinal orchiectomy—Surgical procedure performed to remove one or both testicles. It is done via a groin incision. Testicles—Also called testes or gonads, they are part of the male reproductive system, and are located beneath the penis in the scrotum.

Kirchner, Jeffrey T. “Family History as a Risk Factor For Testicular Cancer.” American Family Physician 57 (March 15, 1998): 1419. “Testicular Cancer—What to Look For.” American Family Physician (May 1, 1998): 1. ORGANIZATIONS

American Cancer Society. (800) ACS-2345. National Cancer Institute. Cancer Information Service. (800) 4CANCER. OTHER

American Cancer Society Cancer Resource Center. (June 19, 2001). . Beeson, Dr. Debra. “Commentary: Testicular Cancer Commonly Seen in Younger Men.” Cancer News (April 12, 2000). (June 19, 2001) . National Cancer Institute CancerNet. (June 19, 2001). . The Testicular Cancer Resource Center. (June 19, 2001). .

Deanna Swartout-Corbeil, R.N.

Testicular scan see Scrotal nuclear medicine scan

Most testicular cancers are first noticed by the man himself. Men should do a TSE every month to find out if the testes contain any suspicious lumps or other irregularities, which could be signs of cancer or infection.

Precautions None.

Description A TSE should take place during a warm shower or bath, when the skin is warm, wet, and soapy. The man needs to step out of the tub so that he is in front of a mirror. The heat from the tub or shower will relax the scrotum (sac containing the testes) and the skin will be softer and thinner, making it easier to feel a lump. It is important that the exam be done very gently. The man should stand facing his mirror and look for swelling on the scrotum. Using both hands, the scrotum should be gently lifted so that the area underneath can be checked. The next step is the examination by hand. The index and middle fingers should be placed under each testicle, with the thumbs on top. The testes should be examined one at a time. The man should roll each testicle between his fingers and thumbs. He should feel for lumps of any size (even as small as a pea) particularly on the front or side of each testicle. He should also look for soreness or irregularities. Next, the epididymis and vas deferens, located on the top and back of the testes, should be felt. This area feels like a cord, and should not be tender.

Normal results It is normal for one testicle to be larger than the other is, and for them to hang at different levels; but the size should stay the same from one month to the next. The testes should be free from lumps, pain, irregularities and swelling.

Abnormal results

Testicular self-examination Definition A testicular self-examination (TSE) is the procedure by which a man checks the appearance and consistency of his testes. 3260

A TSE is considered abnormal if any swelling, tenderness, lumps, or irregularities are found. Hard, unmoving lumps are abnormal, even if they are painless. A lump could be a sign of an infection or a cancerous tumor. A change in testicle size from one month to the next is also abnormal. A feeling of heaviness in the scrotum is another abnormal sign. If any abnormality is found, a man is encouraged to check with his doctor as soon as possible because testicular cancer is highly curable if found early. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Epididymis—A tube in the back of the testes that transports sperm. Scrotum—The pouch containing the testes. Testes—Egg-shaped male gonads located in the scrotum. Testes is the plural form of testis, which is a testicle. Vas deferens—A tube that is a continuation of the epididymis. This tube transports sperm from the testis to the prostatic urethra.

Description Testicular surgery is commonly performed for the following reasons: to reposition undescended testes (orchiopexy); to correct testicular torsion; to treat testicular cancer, which may involve removal of the testicles (castration) or the testes (orchiectomy); and to correct intersex states. Undescended testes

Resources BOOKS

Hainsworth, John D., and F. Anthony Greco. “Testis.” In Cancer Treatment, 5th ed. edited by Charles M. Haskell. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2001. Seidel, Henry M. et al. Mosby’s Guide to Physical Examination, 4th ed. St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1999. PERIODICALS

Schaffner, Robert J. “Knowledge of Testicular Self-exam.” Nurse Practitioner 20 (August 1995): 10-11. OTHER

“Questions and Answers About Testicular Cancer.” Feb. 2000 National Cancer Institute. .

Rhonda Cloos,, R.N.

Testicular sonogram see Scrotal ultrasound

Testicular surgery Definition Testicular surgery is any surgical operation on the testicles.

Purpose Testicular surgery is used primarily to correct developmental defects, treat infection, and treat cancer of the testes.

Precautions Testicular surgery, a group of surgical operations performed on the testicles, is considered major surgery. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Undescended testes are testes that have not dropped into the scrotum. During the fetal stage of development, the testes are not in the scrotum, but in the body. As male children age, the testes descend from the body to the scrotum for proper maturation and function. Undescended testes must be treated with surgery. There are two types of undescended testes, ectopic and cryptorchid. Ectopic testes are outside the normal route of descent. Cryptorchid testes are in the proper route of descent, but descent has been stopped before the testes reached the scrotum. The treatment for undescended testes is a surgical operation called orchiopexy, in which an incision allows the surgeon to reach the testes and pull them down into the scrotum. This operation is best done between the ages of one and two; otherwise, the testes are unlikely to mature normally. If the patient has one normal testis and one poorly developed testis, the undeveloped testis is usually removed. Testicular torsion Testicular torsion is a developmental defect in the tissues of the scrotum that allows the testes to rotate within the scrotum. This results in the blood vessels around other tubes in the scrotum to become wrapped around each other, resulting in blood supply to the testes bring cut off. Torsion disease is seen in young boys. Pain, nausea, and scrotal swelling are the main symptoms. When torsion is suspected, immediate surgery is recommended. An incision is made in the scrotum, and the blood vessels and other tissues are untangled. During surgery, the testes are examined to determine their condition. If they have received enough blood to remain viable, the testes are surgically attached to scrotal tissue to prevent twisting from recurring. If the testes do not regain a healthy pink color after the blood vessels have been untangled, then it is best to remove the testes. The lack of a pink color indicates that the testes have been without blood for too long a time period, and are dead tissue. Unless removed, they will turn necrotic and cause further harm to the body. Usually, testicular torsion 3261

Testicular surgery

KEY TERMS

In all cases, except when the testes are being removed, care must be taken not to damage any of the nerves and blood vessels supplying the testes and associated organs.

Testicular surgery

occurs in only one testis. However, because the other testicle has similar anatomy, it too is subject to torsion. During surgery, the other testicle is attached to scrotal tissue to prevent torsion from occurring. Cancer Carcinoma of the testes is cancer in the testicles. For males between ages 20–35, carcinoma of the testes is the second most common cancer. It accounts for 1–2% of all cancers in all males. There are many kinds of cancer that can affect the testes. A mass of tissue that is suspected to be cancer should be removed surgically. It is recommended that a biopsy not be performed, but that the physician proceed directly to surgery. Biopsies have not proven to be better at diagnosing cancer of the testicles than exploratory surgery. If the presence of cancer is confirmed during exploratory surgery, surgical excision of the cancer can be performed immediately. The approach to the cancer during the operation depends on the location of the tissue mass. The two main approaches are through the scrotum and through the groin (inguinal region). The amount of tissue removed is variable and depends on the amount of cancerous tissue and the location. However, if a solid lesion is confirmed within a testis, a radical orchiectomy should be performed. A radical orchiectomy is a complete removal of one or both testes and associated lymphatic tissue. Other tumors allow partial removal of a testis. After surgery, the tumor is examined to determine the type of tumor for use as a guide in followup therapy. Castration is the surgical removal of the testicles. Castration is performed as a cancer therapy, to reduce the amount of testosterone being produced, and as part of treatment for prostate cancer. In castration, an incision is made through one or both sides of the scrotum, depending on whether one or both testicles are being removed. Intersex states Intersex states are a group of developmental diseases in which the patient has parts of both male and female genitalia. In testicular feminization syndrome, the patient appears to be a female and will have female genitalia but has internal testes. The internal testes are undescended. Genetic studies show that the person was to be a male. This form of intersex is also called male pseudohermaphroditism. There are a number of different causes of this condition. These patients produce the male hormone testosterone. Treatment consists of surgical removal of the internal testes, and the administration of the hormone estrogen, which produces female characteristics. Failure to remove the testes is associated with a higher rate of cancer in these patients. 3262

KEY TERMS Biopsy—Removing tissue to test it for disease. Lesion—An injury in the body tissue, such as a wound, sore, rash, or boil. Orchiectomy—Surgical removal of one or both testes. Orchiopexy—Surgical fixation of one or both testes. Testes—The pair of male reproductive glands enclosed in the scrotum that produce the male sex hormone testosterone and the spermatozoa. The singular form is testis. Testicles—The testes along with their enclosing structures.

Preparation About one hour before receiving general anesthesia, the patient will get a shot that dries up internal fluids and makes him sleepy. Presurgical counseling is often recommended for patients whose reproductive abilities will be compromised by their surgeries.

Aftercare A patient who has had a testicle removed should visit his physician once a month for the first year and every other month for the second year, with periodic followups thereafter.

Risks Testicular surgery, like any major surgery, can have postoperative complications. These complications include internal bleeding and wound infection, as well as adverse reactions to anesthesia.

Normal results Undescended testes are pulled down into their correct position and mature normally. In testicular torsion, the affected testis either regains its healthy pink color and is attached to the surrounding tissue with sutures, or it is removed along with any dead tissue surrounding it. (So long as only one testis is removed, sexual function and fertility will not be affected.) Successful surgery for cancer results in the removal of malignant tissue. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Testicular torsion

Resources BOOKS

Bentz, M. L. Pediatric Plastic Surgery. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1998. Hurst, J. Willis. Medicine for the Practicing Physician. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1988. Sabiston, D. C., and H. K. Lyerly. Essentials of Surgery. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1994.

Twisted spermatic cord

Testicle

Testicular torsion

Scrotum

Definition Testicular torsion is the twisting of a testis (testicle) on its connection.

Description The testes are suspended in the scrotum by a single bundle of tissues that also carries the blood supply to and from the testes. If the testicle rotates, the bundle kinks, and the blood supply is shut off. The resulting situation is an emergency because the testis will die within hours if the blood supply is not restored.

Causes and symptoms Some testes hang in such a way that they twist more easily than others. Nearly all torsions happen to adolescent males—between the ages of 12 and 18—because their testes enlarge by a factor of five to six during puberty. A larger testis is more likely to twist. Torsion can also occur in a newborn. Symptoms of testicular torsion are sudden severe pain in the scrotum, swelling, nausea and vomiting.

Diagnosis A nuclear scan of the scrotum may be performed. In this procedure, a tiny amount of radioactive fluid is injected into the blood and detected as it flows through the scrotum and testicles. Torsion is indicated if the radioactive fluid does not flow through the sore testis. Ultrasound scan accompanied by a contrast agent can also be used to diagnose testicular torsion.

Treatment Surgery must be performed within 24 hours to ensure the health of the affected testis. During the procedure, the surgeon untwists the cord and secures the testis in place so that it cannot rotate again. The other testicle GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

A rare condition, testicular torsion occurs when the spermatic cord is twisted and cuts off the blood supply to the testicle. (Illustration by Argosy Inc.)

KEY TERMS Orchiopexy—The surgical securing of the testis to prevent torsion. Scrotum—The bag of skin below the penis that contains the testes.

should also be secured to deter future testicular torsion. This procedure is called orchiopexy.

Prognosis If the torsion is relieved within 24 hours, the testis will recover normal blood flow and function.

Prevention Torsion of the unaffected testis is prevented by securing it during the surgery to correct the twisted testis. Resources BOOKS

Rajfer, Jacob. “Congenital Anomalies of the Testes and Scrotum.” In Campbell’s Urology, ed. Patrick C. Walsh, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998. 3263

Tetanus

Rozauski, Thomas, et al. “Surgery of the Scrotum and Testis in Children.” In Campbell’s Urology. ed. Patrick C. Walsh, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998. Walsh, Patrick C., et al., ed. Campbell’s Urology. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Testicular ultrasound see Scrotal ultrasound Testicular x ray see Scrotal nuclear medicine scan Testosterone test see Sex hormones tests

Tetanus Definition Tetanus is a rare but often fatal disease that affects the central nervous system by causing painful muscular contractions. It begins when tetanus bacteria enter the body, usually through a wound or cut exposed to contaminated soil. Tetanus is easily preventable through vaccination.

Description Tetanus is rare in the United States, with nearly all cases occurring in adults who were not vaccinated as children. About 100 cases are reported each year; 63% of these occur in people over the age of 50. The number of tetanus cases in the United States has steadily decreased since the 1940s (500 to 600 cases per year); the number of reported cases has remained at approximately 50 to 100 cases per year since the mid-1970s. In 1999, however, the lowest number of annual cases to date was reported (33, or 0.02 per 100,000). Tetanus causes convulsive muscle spasms and rigidity that can lead to respiratory paralysis and death. It is sometimes called “lockjaw” because one of the most common symptoms is a stiff jaw, unable to be opened. Sometimes, tetanus affects only the part of the body where the infection began, but in almost all of reported cases, it spreads to the entire body. The incubation period from the time of the injury until the first symptoms appear ranges from two to 50 days. Symptoms usually occur within five to 10 days. When symptoms occur early, the chance of death is increased. Tetanus is not contagious.

Causes and symptoms Tetanus is caused by a bacteria called Clostridium tetani, whose spores (the dormant form) are found in soil, 3264

street dust, and animal (or even human) feces. Tetanus spores germinate in the body, producing a highly poisonous neurotoxin in the blood, spreading to the nervous system. The infection is usually transmitted through deep puncture wounds or cuts or scratches that are not cleaned well. Between 1997 and 1999, approximately 64% of tetanus cases in the United States were associated with such wounds as punctures, lacerations, or abrasions. Many people associate tetanus with rusty nails and other dirty objects, but any wound can be a source. Less common ways of getting tetanus are animal scratches and bites, surgical wounds, dental work, and therapeutic abortion. About 18% of cases reported between 1997 and 1999 were a result of intravenous drug use. Cases have also been reported in people with no known wound or medical condition. The first symptom of tetanus is often a stiff or “locked” jaw that prevents the patient from opening his/her mouth or swallowing. This is also called trismus and results in a facial expression called a sardonic smile (or risus sardonicus). Stiffness of the neck and other muscles throughout the body and uncontrollable spasms often follow. Sometimes these convulsions are severe enough to cause broken bones. The bacterial toxin (tetanospasmin) affects the nerve endings, causing a continuous stimulation of muscles. Other symptoms include irritability, restlessness, loss of appetite, and drooling. People with tetanus that is localized experience pain and tingling only at the wound site and spasms in nearby muscles. In the underdeveloped world, neonatal tetanus accounts for about one-half of tetanus deaths and is related to infection of the umbilical stump in a baby born of an unimmunized mother. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimate that over 270,000 deaths occur annually worldwide as a result of neonatal tetanus. In contrast, only two cases of neonatal tetanus in the United States were reported to the CDC between 1989 and 1999. Mothers who have been adequately immunized against tetanus protect their newborns by passing the antibody through the placenta.

Diagnosis Tetanus is diagnosed by the clinical symptoms and a medical history that shows no tetanus immunization. Early diagnosis and treatment is crucial to recovery from tetanus.

Treatment Tetanus is a life-threatening disease that requires immediate hospitalization, usually in an intensive care unit (ICU). Treatment can take several weeks and includes antibiotics to kill the bacteria and shots of antiGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tetanus

toxin to neutralize the toxin. It also includes musclerelaxing drugs to control muscle spasms or barbiturates for sedation. In severe cases, patients are placed on an artificial respirator. Recovery can take six weeks or more. After recovery, since the levels of circulating toxin are too low to stimulate natural antibody production, the patient must still be immunized against this disease to prevent reinfection.

Prognosis Up to 30% of tetanus victims in the United States die. Early diagnosis and treatment improves the prognosis. Neonatal tetanus has a mortality rate of more than 90%.

Prevention Pre-exposure vaccination Tetanus is easily preventable through vaccination. All children should have a series of five doses of DTaP, a combined vaccine that offers protection against diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis, before the age of seven, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s national immunization guidelines, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, the Committee on Infectious Diseases of the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the American Academy of Family Physicians. Children will not be admitted to school without proof of this and other immunizations. The DTaP (diptheria, tetanus, accellular pertussis) vaccine should be given at ages two months, four months, six months, 15 to 18 months, and four to six years. DTaP is the preferred vaccine for children up to the age of seven in the United States; it has fewer side effects than DTP and can be used to complete a vaccination schedule begun with DTP. DTaP was first approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in September 1996. In December 1996, it was approved for use in infants. Between the ages of 11 and 13, children should have a booster for diphtheria and tetanus, called Td.

One characteristic of tetanus bacillus is the recurrent contracture of a muscle. Here, the patient’s left hand is affected. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

vaccination and go away in a day or two. Rare but serious side effects that require immediate treatment by a doctor are serious allergic reactions or deep, aching pain and muscle wasting in the upper arms. These symptoms could start from two days to four weeks after the shot and could continue for months. In early 2001, a shortage of the tetanus vaccine became evident after the pharmaceutical company Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories decided to stop production of the tetanus vaccine, leaving Aventis-Pasteur as the sole manufacturer of the vaccine. As a result, hospitals were provided with only a minimal amount of the drug on a weekly basis—enough to vaccinate patients with potentially infected wounds and other priority cases. Despite stepped-up production efforts on the part of the manufacturer, however, a spokesperson for Aventis-Pasteur predicted that the shortage would last until the end of 2001, as the vaccine takes 11 months to produce. Post-exposure care

Adults should have a Td booster every 10 years. Statistics from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) show that fewer than half of Americans 60 years of age and older have antibodies against tetanus. The CDC suggests adults may be revaccinated at middecade birthdays (for example, 45, 55). Adults who have never been vaccinated against tetanus should get a series of three injections of Td over six to 12 months and then follow the 10-year booster shot schedule.

Keeping wounds and scratches clean is important in preventing infection. Since this organism grows only in the absence of oxygen, wounds must be adequately cleaned of dead tissue and foreign substances. Run cool water over the wound and wash it with a mild soap. Dry it with a clean cloth or sterile gauze. To help prevent infection, apply an antibiotic cream or ointment and cover the wound with a bandage. The longer a wound takes to heal, the greater the chance of infection. If the wound doesn’t heal, or if it is red, warm, drains, or swells, consult a doctor.

Side effects of the tetanus vaccine are minor: soreness, redness, or swelling at the site of the injection that appear anytime from a few hours to two days after the

Following a wound, to produce rapid levels of circulating antibody, a doctor may administer a specific antitoxin (human tetanus immune globulin, TIG) if the individual

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

3265

Tetracyclines

Tetracyclines

KEY TERMS Clostridium—A genus of deadly bacteria that are responsible for tetanus and other serious diseases, including botulism and gangrene from war wounds. Clostridia thrive without oxygen. DTaP—Diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and accellular pertussis combination vaccine. DTP— Diphtheria, tetanus, and whole-cell pertussis vaccine. Td—Tetanus and diphtheria vaccine. Toxin—A poisonous substance that flows through the body. Wound—Any injury that breaks the skin, including cuts, scratches, and puncture wounds.

Definition Tetracyclines are medicines that kill certain infection-causing microorganisms.

Purpose Tetracyclines are called “broad-spectrum” antibiotics, because they can be used to treat a wide variety of infections. Physicians may prescribe these drugs to treat eye infections, pneumonia, gonorrhea, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, urinary tract infections, and other infections caused by bacteria. The medicine is also used to treat acne. The tetracyclines will not work for colds, flu, and other infections caused by viruses.

Description does not have an adequate history of immunization. The antitoxin is given at the same sitting as a dose of vaccine but at separate sites. Some individuals will report a history of significant allergy to “tetanus shots.” In most cases, this occurred in the remote past and was probably due to the previous use of antitoxin derived from horse serum.

Recommended dosage

Resources PERIODICALS

“Have You Had Your Shots Yet?” Tufts University Health & Nutrition Newsletter (August 1997): 4. Landers, Susan J. “Tetanus vaccine shortage leads to rationing.” American Medical News. . (19 March 2001). Zamalu, Evelyn. “Adults Need Tetanus Shots, Too.” FDA Consumer (July/August 1996): 14-18. OTHER

“Childhood Infections: Tetanus.” The Nemours Foundation of the duPont Hospital for Children and the Nemours Children’s Clinic. . (10 December 1997). “Shots for Safety.” National Institute on Aging Age Page. . (7 December 1997). “Taking Care of Cuts, Scrapes, and Minor Wounds: What Mom May Not Have Told You.” Mayo Health Oasis. . (9 December 1997). “Tetanus.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. . “Tetanus & Diphtheria (Td) Vaccine.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. . (10 December 1997).

Lori De Milto 3266

Tetracyclines are available only with a physician’s prescription. They are sold in capsule, tablet, liquid, and injectable forms. Some commonly used medicines in this group are tetracycline (Achromycin V, Sumycin) and doxycycline (Doryx, Vibramycin).

The recommended dosage depends on the type of tetracycline, its strength, and the type and severity of infection for which it is being taken. Check with the physician who prescribed the drug or the pharmacist who filled the prescription for the correct dosage. To make sure the infection clears up completely, take the medicine for as long as it has been prescribed. Do not stop taking the drug just because symptoms begin to improve. Tetracyclines work best when they are at constant levels in the blood. To help keep levels constant, take the medicine in doses spaced evenly through the day and night. Do not miss any doses. This medicine works best when taken on an empty stomach, with a full glass of water. The water will help prevent irritation of the stomach and esophagus (the tube-like structure that runs from the throat to the stomach). If the medicine still causes stomach upset, it may be necessary to take it with food. However, tetracyclines should never be taken with milk or milk products, as these may prevent the medicine from working properly. Do not drink or eat milk or dairy products within one to two hours of taking tetracyclines (except doxycycline and minocycline). GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Taking outdated tetracyclines can cause serious side effects. Do not take this medicine if: • its color, appearance, or taste have changed • it has been stored in a warm or damp area • the expiration date on its label has passed flush any such medicine down the toilet, if there is any question about whether the medicine is still good, check with a physician or pharmacist Do not take antacids, calcium supplements, salicylates such as Magan or Trilisate, magnesium-containing laxatives, or sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) within one to two hours of taking tetracyclines. Do not take any medicines that contain iron (including multivitamin and mineral supplements) within two to three hours of taking tetracyclines. Some people feel dizzy when taking these drugs. The medicine may also cause blurred vision. Because of these possible effects, anyone who takes these drugs should not drive, use machines or do anything else that might be dangerous until they have found out how the drugs affect them. Birth control pills may not work properly while tetracyclines are being taken. To prevent pregnancy, use alternative methods of birth control while taking tetracyclines. This medicine may increase sensitivity to sunlight. Even brief exposure to sun can cause a severe sunburn or a rash. While being treated with this medicine, avoid being in direct sunlight, especially between 10 A.M. and 3 P.M.; wear a hat and tightly woven clothing that covers the arms and legs; use a sunscreen with a skin protection factor (SPF) of at least 15; protect the lips with a sun block lipstick; and do not use tanning beds, tanning booths, or sunlamps. The sensitivity to sunlight and sunlamps may continue for two weeks to several months after stopping the medicine, so continue to be careful about sun exposure. Tetracyclines may permanently discolor the teeth of people who took the medicine in childhood. The drugs may also slow down the growth of children’s bones. Do not give tetracyclines to infants or children under 8 years of age unless directed to do so by the child’s physician. Special conditions People with certain medical conditions or who are taking certain other medicines may have problems if they take tetracyclines. Before taking these drugs, be sure to let the physician know about any of these conditions: GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to tetracyclines in the past should let his or her physician know before taking the drugs again. The physician should also be told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances. PREGNANCY. Pregnant women should not take tetracyclines during the last half of pregnancy. These drugs can prevent the baby’s bones and teeth from developing properly and can cause the baby’s adult teeth to be permanently discolored. The medicine can also cause liver problems in pregnant women. BREASTFEEDING. Women who are breastfeeding should not take tetracyclines. The drugs pass into breast milk and can affect the nursing baby’s teeth and bones. They may also make the baby more sensitive to sunlight and may increase its risk of fungal infections. OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Before using tetracyclines, people with any of these medical problems should make sure their physicians are aware of their conditions:

• diabetes • liver disease • kidney disease USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking tetracyclines with certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs work or may increase the chance of side effects.

Side effects The most common side effects are stomach cramps or a burning sensation in the stomach, mild diarrhea, nausea, or vomiting. These problems usually go away as the body adjusts to the drug and do not require medical treatment. Less common side effects, such as sore mouth or tongue and itching of the rectal or genital areas also may occur and do not need medical attention unless they do not go away or they are bothersome. Other rare side effects may occur. Anyone who has unusual symptoms during or after treatment with tetracyclines should get in touch with his or her physician.

Interactions Tetracyclines may interact with other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or both of the drugs may change or the risk of side effects may be greater. Anyone who takes tetracyclines should let the physician know all other medicines he or she is taking. Among the drugs that may interact with tetracyclines are: • antacids 3267

Tetracyclines

Precautions

Tetralogy of Fallot

KEY TERMS

KEY TERMS

Gonorrhea—A sexually transmitted disease (STD) that causes infection in the genital organs and may cause disease in other parts of the body.

Aorta—Main arterial trunk that moves blood from the heart to the arteries, which transport the blood throughout the body.

Microorganism—An organism that is too small to be seen with the naked eye.

Cyanosis—Blue-colored skin due to oxygen-deficient blood.

Rocky Mountain spotted fever—An infectious disease that is caused by a microorganism and spread by ticks. High fever, muscle pain, and spots on the skin are among the symptoms.

Endocarditis—Inflammation of the lining of the heart.

Salicylates—A group of drugs that includes aspirin and related compounds. Salicylates are used to relieve pain, reduce inflammation, and lower fever.

Septicemia—Blood poisoning.

Infarct—Death of tissue due to shutting off the blood supply. Systemic circulation—Through the body, as opposed to “pulmonary”—through the lungs. Ventricles—The muscular chambers of the heart that do the pumping.

• calcium supplements • medicines that contain iron (including multivitamin and mineral supplements) • laxatives that contain magnesium • cholesterol-lowering drugs such as cholestyramine (Questran) and colestipol (Colestid)

• ventricular septal defect (Abnormal passageway between the right and left ventricles) • displaced aorta

• salicylates such as Magan and Trilisate

• narrowed pulmonary valve

• penicillins

• thickened right ventricle wall

• birth control pills

Each defect acts in combination with the others to create a malfunction of the heart. The problem starts very early in the uterus with a narrowed pulmonary valve and a hole between the ventricles. This is not particularly a problem for a fetus because hardly any blood flows through the lungs until birth. It is only after birth that the defects pose a problem. The blood that is supposed to start flowing through the lungs cannot easily get there because of the narrowed valve; however, the hole between the ventricles remains open. Because of the opening between ventricles, much of the blood that comes back to the heart needing oxygen is sent out without being properly oxygenated. In addition, the right heart has to pump at the same pressure as the left side. Several changes follow. First, the baby turns blue (cyanotic) because of the deoxygenated blood that bypasses the lungs. Deoxygenated blood is darker and appears blue through the skin. Second, the right side of the heart (ventricle) hypertrophies (gets more muscular) from the extra exercise demanded of it. Next, the low oxygen causes the blood to get thicker and clot more easily. Clots in the veins can now pass through the hole in the heart and directly enter the aorta, where they can do much more damage than in the lungs—such as causing infarcts in the brain. In addition, these anomalies make the lining of the heart more suscep-

Nancy Ross-Flanigan

Tetralogy of Fallot Definition Tetralogy of Fallot is a common syndrome of congenital heart defects.

Description The heart is two pumps in one. The ventricle on the left side pumps blood full of oxygen through the body; the ventricle on the right side pumps the same blood through the pulmonary artery to the lungs to take up oxygen. The left ventricle operates at pressures about four times as high as the right ventricle. Blood is supposed to flow through one side, then the other. Tetralogy of Fallot is a condition that is characterized by several congenital heart defects occurring at once. They include: 3268

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tetralogy of Fallot

Displaced aorta

Narrowed pulmonary valve

Hole in ventricular septum Thickened wall of right ventricle

Tetralogy of Fallot is a common syndrome of congenital heart defects. This condition, present in utero, is caused by the narrowing of the pulmonary artery and a hole between the ventricles. When the baby is born and begins to breathe on its own, the baby turns cyanotic, or blue, due to the deoxygenated blood that bypasses the lungs because of the narrowed pathway and because the hole between the ventricles has remained open. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

tible to infection—endocarditis— which can damage valves and lead to blood poisoning (septicemia).

Causes and symptoms Tetralogy of Fallot is a congenital defect with unknown causes. Babies with tetralogy of Fallot are blue at birth (cyanosis). Sometimes the blue color appears only when they cry. They also have detectable heart murmurs. Infants with mild forms can have surgery postponed until they are older. Infants with more severe symptoms often have attacks of worsened cyanosis. During attacks, they turn very blue, have shortness of breath, and can faint. This usually occurs during heightened activity, such as crying.

Treatment Correction of the defects are done through surgery. Surgery must be carefully timed with attention to the progression of the disease process, the size of the infant, and the size of the various defects. There are temporary surgical procedures that can prolong the time before corrective surgery while the baby grows larger and stronger. During surgery, the pulmonary valve is widened, the ventricular septal defect is closed, and any interim corrections removed.

Prognosis Surgical correction has a high rate of success, returning the child to near-normal health.

Diagnosis A complete evaluation of the circulation is required, including testing the blood for its oxygen content, ultrasound and x rays of the heart accompanied by a contrast agent to determine the amount of blood flowing in the wrong direction. A search for other birth defects is also necessary, because they tend to happen together. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Resources BOOKS

Friedman, William F., and John S. Child. “Congenital Heart Disease in the Adult.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. 3269

Thalassemia

Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. Ed. Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Thalassemia Definition Thalassemia describes a group of inherited disorders characterized by reduced or absent amounts of hemoglobin, the oxygen-carrying protein inside the red blood cells. There are two basic groups of thalassemia disorders: alpha thalassemia and beta thalassemia. These conditions cause varying degrees of anemia, which can range from insignificant to life threatening.

Description All types of thalassemias are considered quantitative diseases of hemoglobin, because the quantity of hemoglobin produced is reduced or absent. Usual adult hemoglobin is made up of three components: alpha globin, beta globin, and heme. Thalassemias are classified according to the globin that is affected, hence the names alpha and beta thalassemia. Although both classes of thalassemia affect the same protein, the alpha and beta thalassemias are distinct diseases that affect the body in different ways. Beta thalassemia Beta thalassemia may be the best-known type of thalassemia and is also called Cooley’s anemia. It is caused by a change in the gene for the beta globin component of hemoglobin. Beta thalassemia causes variable anemia that can range from moderate to severe, depending in part on the exact genetic change underlying the disease. Beta thalassemia can be classified based on clinical symptoms. Beta thalassemia major usually causes severe anemia that can occur within months after birth. If left untreated, severe anemia can result in insufficient growth and development, as well as other characteristic physical complications that can lead to a dramatically decreased life-expectancy. Fortunately, in developed countries beta thalassemia is usually identified by screening in the newborn period, before symptoms have developed. Children who are identified early can be started on ongoing blood transfusion therapy as needed. Although transfusion therapy prevents many of the complications of severe anemia, the body is unable to eliminate the excess iron contained in the transfused blood. Over time, this excess 3270

iron deposits in tissues and organs, resulting in damage and organ failure. Another medication must be administered to help the body eliminate the excess iron and prevent iron-overload complications. Beta thalassemia intermedia describes the disease in individuals who have moderate anemia that only requires blood transfusions intermittently, if at all. Alpha thalassemia Alpha thalassemia is the result of changes in the genes for the alpha globin component of hemoglobin. There are two main types of alpha thalassemia disease: hemoglobin H disease and alpha thalassemia major. The two diseases are quite different from beta thalassemia as well as from one another. Individuals with hemoglobin H disease can experience events of hemolytic anemia— anemia caused by the rapid breakdown of the red blood cells. These events are thought to be triggered by various environmental causes, such as infection and/or exposure to certain chemicals. Hemoglobin H disease is in most cases milder than beta thalassemia. It does not generally require transfusion therapy. Alpha thalassemia major is a very serious disease that results in severe anemia that begins even before birth. Most affected babies do not survive to be born or die shortly after birth. The thalassemias are among the most common genetic diseases worldwide. Both alpha and beta thalassemia have been described in individuals of almost every ancestry, but the conditions are more common among certain ethnic groups. Unaffected carriers of all types of thalassemia traits do not experience health problems. In fact, the thalassemia trait is protective against malaria, a disease caused by blood-borne parasites transmitted through mosquito bites. According to a widely accepted theory, most genetic changes—mutations—that cause thalassemia occurred multiple generations ago. Coincidentally, these mutations increased the likelihood that carriers would survive malaria infection. Survivors passed the mutation onto their offspring, and the trait became established throughout areas where malaria is common. As populations migrated, so did the thalassemia traits. Beta thalassemia trait is seen most commonly in people with the following ancestry: Mediterranean (including North African, and particularly Italian and Greek), Middle Eastern, Indian, African, Chinese, and Southeast Asian (including Vietnamese, Laotian, Thai, Singaporean, Filipino, Cambodian, Malaysian, Burmese, and Indonesian). Alpha-thalassemia trait is seen with increased frequency in the same ethnic groups. However, there are different types of alpha thalassemia traits within these populations. The frequency of hemoglobin H disease and alpha thalassemia major depends on the type of GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

It is difficult to obtain accurate prevalence figures for various types of thalassemia within different populations. This difficulty arises due to testing limitations in determining exact genetic diagnoses, as well as the fact that many studies have focused on small, biased hospital populations. Two studies reflect prevalence figures that can be helpful counseling families and determining who to screen for beta thalassemia. Between the years of 1990 and 1996, the State of California screened over 3.1 million infants born in this multiethnic state for beta thalassemia. Approximately one in 114,000 infants had beta thalassemia major, with prevalence rates being highest among Asian Indians (about one in 4,000), Southeast Asians (about one in 10,000), and Middle Easterners (about one in 7,000). Another type of beta thalassemia disease, E/beta thalassemia, was represented in approximately one in 110,000 births, all of which occurred in families of Southeast Asian ancestry. Among Southeast Asians, the prevalence of E/beta thalassemia was approximately one in 2,600 births. This is in keeping with the observation that hemoglobin E trait carrier rates are relatively high within the Southeast Asian population: 16% in a study of 768 immigrants to California, and up to 25% in some specific Southeast Asian populations such as Cambodians. While these California studies address some of the limitations of earlier population studies, the pattern observed in California is expected to be different in other areas of the United States and the world. For example, Italians are underrepresented in this population when compared to the population of the East Coast of the United States. Determining prevalence figures for alpha thalassemia is even more difficult due to increased limitations in diagnostic testing. All types of alpha thalassemia disease are most common among people of Southeast Asian and Chinese descent, for reasons that become clearer with an understanding of the underlying genetics of alpha thalassemia. One study of 500 pregnant women in Northern Thailand estimated a frequency of one in 500 pregnancies affected by alpha thalassemia major, for example. Prevalence of alpha thalassemia disease is significantly lower in the United States owing primarily to immigration patterns; although at least one state, California, has observed growing hemoglobin H disease incidence rates that are high enough to justify universal newborn screening for the condition.

Causes Genetics Humans normally make several types of the oxygencarrying protein hemoglobin. An individual’s stage in GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

development determines whether he or she makes primarily embryonic, fetal, or adult hemoglobins. All types of hemoglobin are made of three components: heme, alpha (or alpha-like) globin, and beta (or beta-like) globin. All types of thalassemia are caused by changes in either the alpha- or beta-globin gene. These changes cause little or no globin to be produced. The thalassemias are, therefore, considered quantitative hemoglobin diseases. All types of thalassemias are recessively inherited, meaning that a genetic change must be inherited from both the mother and the father. The severity of the disease is influenced by the exact thalassemia mutations inherited, as well as other genetic and environmental factors. There are rare exceptions, notably with beta thalassemia, where globin gene mutations exhibit a dominant pattern of inheritance in which only one gene needs to be altered in order to see disease expression. BETA-THALASSEMIA. Most individuals have two normal copies of the beta globin gene, which is located on chromosome 11 and makes the beta globin component of normal adult hemoglobin, hemoglobin A. There are approximately 100 genetic mutations that have been described that cause beta thalassemia, designated as either beta0 or beta+ mutations. No beta globin is produced with a beta0 mutation, and only a small fraction of the normal amount of beta globin is produced with a beta+ mutation.

When an individual has one normal beta globin gene and one with a beta thalassemia mutation, he or she is said to carry the beta thalassemia trait. Beta thalassemia trait, like other hemoglobin traits, is protective against malaria infection. Trait status is generally thought not to cause health problems, although some women with beta thalassemia trait may have an increased tendency toward anemia during pregnancy. When two members of a couple carry the beta thalassemia trait, there is a 25% chance that each of their children will inherit beta thalassemia disease by inheriting two beta thalassemia mutations, one from each parent. The clinical severity of the beta thalassemia disease—whether an individual has beta thalassemia intermedia or beta thalassemia major—will depend largely on whether the mutations inherited are beta0 thalassemia or beta+ thalassemia mutations. Two beta0 mutations generally lead to beta thalassemia major, and two beta+ thalassemia mutations generally lead to beta thalassemia intermedia. Inheritance of one beta0 and one beta+ thalassemia mutation tends to be less predictable. Although relatively uncommon, there are other thalassemia-like mutations that can affect the beta globin gene. Hemoglobin E is the result of a substitution of a single nucleotide. This change results in a structurally 3271

Thalassemia

alpha thalassemia trait. The populations in which alpha thalassemia diseases are most common include Southeast Asians and Chinese (particularly Southern Chinese).

Thalassemia

altered hemoglobin that is produced in decreased amounts. Therefore, hemoglobin E is unique in that it is both a quantitative (i.e. thalassemia-like) and qualitative trait. When co-inherited with a beta thalassemia trait, it causes a disease that is almost indistinguishable from beta thalassemia disease. Large deletions around and including the beta globin gene can lead to delta/beta thalassemia or hereditary persistence of fetal hemoglobin (HPFH). Interestingly, delta/beta thalassemia trait behaves very similar to beta thalassemia trait in its clinical manisfestations. However, HPFH trait does not tend to cause hemoglobin disease when co-inherited with a second thalassemia or other beta globin mutation. ALPHA-THALASSEMIA. Most individuals have four normal copies of the alpha globin gene, two copies on each chromosome 16. These genes make the alpha globin component of normal adult hemoglobin, which is called hemoglobin A. Alpha globin is also a component of fetal hemoglobin and the other major adult hemoglobin called hemoglobin A2. Mutations of the alpha globin genes are usually deletions of the gene, resulting in absent production of alpha globin. Since there are four genes (instead of the usual two) to consider when looking at alpha globin gene inheritance, there are several alpha globin types that are possible.

Absence of one alpha globin gene leads to a condition known as silent alpha thalassemia trait. This condition causes no health problems and can be detected only by special genetic testing. Alpha thalassemia trait occurs when two alpha globin genes are missing. This can occur in two ways. The genes may be deleted from the same chromosome, causing the ‘cis’ type of alpha thalassemia trait. Alternately, they may be deleted from different chromosomes, causing the ‘trans’ type of alpha thalassemia trait. In both instances, there are no associated health problems, although the trait status may be detected by more routine blood screening. Hemoglobin H disease results from the deletion of three alpha globin genes, such that there is only one functioning gene. Typically, this can occur when one parent carries the silent alpha thalassemia trait, and the other parent carries the ‘cis’ type of the alpha thalassemia trait. In this situation, there is a 25% chance for hemoglobin H disease in each of such a couple’s children. Hemoglobin H disease-like symptoms can also be a part of a unique condition called alpha thalassemia mental retardation syndrome. Alpha thalassemia mental retardation syndrome can be caused by a deletion of a significant amount of chromosome 16, affecting the alpha globin genes. This is usually not inherited, but rather occurs sporadically in the affected individual. Affected individuals have mild hemoglobin H disease, 3272

mild-to-moderate mental retardation, and characteristic facial features. This syndrome can also occur as a sexlinked form in which a mutation is inherited in a particular gene on the X-chromosome. This gene influences alpha globin production, as well as various other developmental processes. Individuals affected with this form of the syndrome tend to have more severe mental retardation, delayed development, nearly absent speech, characteristic facial features, and genital-urinary abnormalities. The remaining discussion will focus only on aspects of hemoglobin H disease. Alpha thalassemia major results from the deletion of all four alpha globin genes, such that there are no functioning alpha globin genes. This can occur when both parents carry the ‘cis’ type of the alpha thalassemia trait. In this situation, there is a 25% chance for alpha thalassemia major in each of such a couple’s children.

Symptoms Beta thalassemia Beta thalassemia major is characterized by severe anemia that can begin months after birth. In the United States and other developed countries beta thalassemia is identified and treated early and effectively. Therefore, the following discussion of symptoms applies primarily to affected individuals in the past and unfortunately in some underdeveloped countries now. If untreated, beta thalassemia major can lead to severe lethargy, paleness, and growth and developmental delay. The body attempts to compensate by producing more blood, which is made inside the bones in the marrow. However, this is ineffective without the needed genetic instructions to make enough functioning hemoglobin. Instead, obvious bone expansion and changes occur that cause characteristic facial and other changes in appearance, as well as increased risk of fractures. Severe anemia taxes other organs in the body—such as the heart, spleen, and liver—which must work harder than usual. This can lead to heart failure, as well as enlargement and other problems of the liver and spleen. When untreated, beta thalassemia major generally results in childhood death, usually due to heart failure. Fortunately, in developed countries diagnosis is usually made early, often before symptoms have begun. This allows for treatment with blood transfusion therapy, which can prevent most of the complications of the severe anemia caused by beta thalassemia major. Individuals with beta thalassemia intermedia have a more moderate anemia that may only require treatment with transfusion intermittently, such as when infections occur and stress the body. As a person with beta thalassemia intermedia gets older, however, the need for blood transfusions may increase to the point that GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Anemia—A blood condition in which the level of hemoglobin or the number of red blood cells falls below normal values. Common symptoms include paleness, fatigue, and shortness of breath.

Hemoglobin electrophoresis—A laboratory test that separates molecules based on their size, shape, or electrical charge.

Bilirubin—A yellow pigment that is the end result of hemoglobin breakdown. This pigment is metabolized in the liver and excreted from the body through the bile. Bloodstream levels are normally low; however, extensive red cell destruction leads to excessive bilirubin formation and jaundice.

HLA type—Refers to the unique set of proteins called human leukocyte antigens. These proteins are present on each individual’s cell and allow the immune system to recognize ‘self’ from ‘foreign’. HLA type is particularly important in organ and tissue transplantation.

Bone marrow—A spongy tissue located in the hollow centers of certain bones, such as the skull and hip bones. Bone marrow is the site of blood cell generation.

Hydroxyurea—A drug that has been shown to induce production of fetal hemoglobin. Fetal hemoglobin has a pair of gamma-globin molecules in place of the typical beta-globins of adult hemoglobin. Higher-than-normal levels of fetal hemoglobin can ameliorate some of the symptoms of thalassemia.

Bone marrow transplantation—A medical procedure used to treat some diseases that arise from defective blood cell formation in the bone marrow. Healthy bone marrow is extracted from a donor to replace the marrow in an ailing individual. Proteins on the surface of bone marrow cells must be identical or very closely matched between a donor and the recipient. Desferoxamine—The primary drug used in iron chelation therapy. It aids in counteracting the lifethreatening buildup of iron in the body associated with long-term blood transfusions. Globin—One of the component protein molecules found in hemoglobin. Normal adult hemoglobin has a pair each of alpha-globin and beta-globin molecules. Heme—The iron-containing molecule in hemoglobin that serves as the site for oxygen binding. Hemoglobin—Protein-iron compound in the blood that carries oxygen to the cells and carries carbon dioxide away from the cells. Hemoglobin A—Normal adult hemoglobin that contains a heme molecule, two alpha-globin molecules, and two beta-globin molecules.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Hepatomegaly—An abnormally large liver.

Iron overload—A side effect of frequent blood transfusions in which the body accumulates abnormally high levels of iron. Iron deposits can form in organs, particularly the heart, and cause life-threatening damage. Jaundice—Yellowing of the skin or eyes due to excess of bilirubin in the blood. Mutation—A permanent change in the genetic material that may alter a trait or characteristic of an individual, or manifest as disease, and can be transmitted to offspring. Placenta—The organ responsible for oxygen and nutrition exchange between a pregnant mother and her developing baby. Red blood cell—Hemoglobin-containing blood cells that transport oxygen from the lungs to tissues. In the tissues, the red blood cells exchange their oxygen for carbon dioxide, which is brought back to the lungs to be exhaled. Screening—Process through which carriers of a trait may be identified within a population. Splenomegaly—Enlargement of the spleen.

3273

Thalassemia

KEY TERMS

Thalassemia

they are required on a regular basis. When this occurs their disease becomes more similar to beta thalassemia major. Other genetic and environmental factors can influence the course of the disease as well. For example, coinheritance of one or two alpha thalassemia mutations can tend to ameliorate some of the symptoms of beta thalassemia disease, which result in part from an imbalance in the amount of alpha- and beta-globin present in the red blood cells. Hemoglobin H disease Absence of three alpha globin genes causes an imbalance of alpha and beta globin proteins in the red blood cells. The excess beta globin proteins tend to come together to form hemoglobin H, which is unable to release oxygen to the tissues. In addition, hemoglobin H tends to precipitate out in the cells, causing damage to the red blood cell membrane. When affected individuals are exposed to certain drugs and chemicals known to make the membrane more fragile, the cells are thought to become vulnerable to breakdown in large numbers, a complication called hemolytic anemia. Fever and infection are also considered to be triggers of hemolytic anemia in hemoglobin H disease. This can result in fatigue, paleness, and a yellow discoloration of the skin and whites of eyes called jaundice. Usually, the anemia is mild enough not to require treatment. Severe anemia events may require blood transfusion, however, and are usually accompanied by such other symptoms as dark feces or urine and abdominal or back pain. These events are uncommon in hemoglobin H disease, although they occur more frequently in a more serious type of hemoglobin H disease called hemoglobin H/Constant Spring disease. Individuals effected with this type of hemoglobin H disease are also more likely to have enlargement of and other problems with the spleen. Alpha thalassemia major Because alpha globin is a necessary component of all major hemoglobins and some minor hemoglobins, absence of all functioning alpha globin genes leads to serious medical consequences that begin even before birth. Affected fetuses develop severe anemia as early as the first trimester of pregnancy. The placenta, heart, liver, spleen, and adrenal glands may all become enlarged. Fluid can begin collecting throughout the body as early as the start of the second trimester, causing damage to developing tissues and organs. Growth retardation is also common. Affected fetuses usually miscarry or die shortly after birth. In addition, women carrying affected fetuses are at increased risk of developing complications of pregnancy and delivery. Up to 80% of such women develop toxemia, a disturbance of metabolism that can potentially lead to 3274

convulsions and coma. Other maternal complications include premature delivery and increased rates of delivery by cesarean section, as well as hemorrhage after delivery.

Diagnosis Thalassemia may be suspected if an individual shows signs that are suggestive of the disease. In all cases, however, laboratory diagnosis is essential to confirm the exact diagnosis and to allow for the provision of accurate genetic counseling about recurrence risks and testing options for parents and affected individuals. Screening is likewise recommended to determine trait status for individuals of high-risk ethnic groups. The following tests are used to screen for thalassemia disease and/or trait: • complete blood count • hemoglobin electrophoresis with quantitative hemoglobin A2 and hemoglobin F • free erythrocyte-protoporphyrin (or ferritin or other studies of serum iron levels) A complete blood count will identify low levels of hemoglobin, small red blood cells, and other red blood cell abnormalities that are characteristic of a thalassemia diagnosis. Since thalassemia trait can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from iron deficiency, tests to evaluate iron levels are important. A hemoglobin electrophoresis is a test that can help identify the types and quantities of hemoglobin made by an individual. This test uses an electric field applied across a slab of gel-like material. Hemoglobins migrate through this gel at various rates and to specific locations, depending on their size, shape, and electrical charge. Isoelectric focusing and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) use similar principles to separate hemoglobins and can be used instead of or in various combinations with hemoglobin electrophoresis to determine the types and quantities of hemoglobin present. Hemoglobin electrophoresis results are usually within the normal range for all types of alpha thalassemia. However, hemoglobin A2 levels and sometimes hemoglobin F levels are elevated when beta thalassemia disease or trait is present. Hemoglobin electrophoresis can also detect structurally abnormal hemoglobins that may be co-inherited with a thalassemia trait to cause thalassemia disease (i.e., hemoglobin E) or other types of hemoglobin disease (i.e., sickle hemoglobin). Sometimes DNA testing is needed in addition to the above screening tests. This can be performed to help confirm the diagnosis and establish the exact genetic type of thalassemia. Diagnosis of thalassemia can occur under various circumstances and at various ages. Several states offer thalassemia screening as part of the usual battery of blood GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Treatment Beta Thalassemia Individuals with beta thalassemia major receive regular blood transfusions, usually on a monthly basis. This helps prevent severe anemia and allow for more normal growth and development. Transfusion therapy does have limitations, however. Individuals can develop reactions to certain proteins in the blood—called a transfusion reaction. This can make locating appropriately matched donor blood more difficult. Although blood supplies in the United States are very safe, particularly relative to the past and to other areas of the world, there remains an increased risk of exposure to such blood-borne infections as hepatitis. Additionally, the body is not able to get rid of the excess iron that accompanies each transfusion. An additional medication called desferoxamine is administered, usually five nights per week over a period of several hours, using an automatic pump that can be used during sleep or taken anywhere the person goes. This medication is able to bind to the excess iron, which can then be eliminated through urine. If desferoxamine is not used regularly or is unavailable, iron overload can develop and cause tissue damage and organ damage and failure. The heart, liver, and endocrine organs are particularly vulnerable. Desferoxamine itself may rarely produce allergic or toxic side effects, including hearing damage. Signs of desferoxamine toxicity are screened for and generally develop in individuals who overuse the medication when body iron levels are sufficiently low. Overall, however, GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

transfusion and desferoxamine therapy have increased the life expectancy of individuals with the most severe types of beta thalassemia major to the 4th or 5th decade. This can be expected to improve with time and increased developments in treatment, as well as for those with more mild forms of the disease. New treatments offer additional options for some individuals with beta thalassemia major. There are various medications that target the production of red blood cells (i.e. erythropoeitin) or fetal hemoglobin (i.e. hydroxyurea and butyrate). Their effectiveness in ameliorating the severity of beta thalassemia is currently being investigated. Another promising new treatment is bone marrow transplantation, in which the bone marrow of an affected individual is replaced with the bone marrow of an unaffected donor. If successful, this treatment can provide a cure. However, there is an approximately 10-15% chance the procedure could be unsuccessful (i.e. the thalassemia returns); result in complications (i.e. graft-versus-host disease); or result in death. The risk for specific individuals depends on current health status, age, and other factors. Because of the risks involved and the fact that beta thalassemia is a treatable condition, transplant physicians require a brother or sister donor who has an identically matched tissue type, called HLA type. HLA type refers to the unique set of proteins present on each individual’s cells, which allows the immune system to recognize “self” from “foreign.” HLA type is genetically determined, so there is a 25% chance for two siblings to be a match. Transplant physicians and researchers are also investigating ways to improve the safety and effectiveness of bone marrow transplantation. Using newborn sibling umbilical cord blood—the blood from the placenta that is otherwise discarded after birth but contains cells that can go on to make bone marrow—seems to provide a safer and perhaps more effective source of donor cells. Donors and recipients may not have to be perfect HLA matches for a successful transplant using cord blood cells. Trials are also underway to determine the effectiveness of “partial transplants,” in which a safer transplant procedure is used to replace only a percentage of the affected individual’s bone marrow. Other possible treatments on the horizon may include gene therapy techniques aimed at increasing the amount of normal hemoglobin the body is able to make. Hemoglobin H disease Hemoglobin H disease is a relatively mild form of thalassemia that may go unrecognized. It is not generally considered a condition that will reduce one’s life expectancy. Education is an important part of managing the health of an individual with hemoglobin H disease. It is important to be able to recognize the signs of severe 3275

Thalassemia

tests done for newborns. This allows for early identification and treatment. Thalassemia can be identified before birth through the use of prenatal diagnosis. Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) can be offered as early as 10 weeks of pregnancy and involves removing a sample of the placenta made by the baby and testing the cells. CVS carries a risk of causing a miscarriage that is between 0.5%–1%. Amniocentesis is generally offered between 15 and 22 weeks of pregnancy, but can sometimes be offered earlier. Two to three tablespoons of the fluid surrounding the baby is removed. This fluid contains fetal cells that can be tested. The risk of miscarriage associated with amniocentesis ranges from 0.33–0.5%. Pregnant woman and couples may choose prenatal testing in order to prepare for the birth of a baby that may have thalassemia. Alternately, knowing the diagnosis during pregnancy allows for the option of pregnancy termination. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is a relatively new technique that involves in-vitro fertilization followed by genetic testing of one cell from each developing embryo. Only the embryos unaffected by sickle cell disease are transferred back into the uterus. PGD is currently available on a research basis only and is relatively expensive.

Thalassemia

anemia that require medical attention. It is also important to be aware of the medications, chemicals, and other exposures to avoid due to the theoretical risk they pose of causing a severe anemia event. When severe anemia occurs, it is treated with blood transfusion therapy. For individuals with hemoglobin H disease, this is rarely required. For those with the hemoglobin H/Constant Spring form of the disease, the need for transfusions may be intermittent or ongoing, perhaps on a monthly basis and requiring desferoxamine treatment. Individuals with this more severe form of the disease may also have an increased chance of requiring removal of an enlarged and/or overactive spleen. Alpha thalassemia major Because alpha thalassemia major is most often a condition that is fatal in the prenatal or newborn period, treatment has previously been focused on identifying affected pregnancies in order to provide appropriate management to reduce potential maternal complications. Pregnancy termination provides one form of management. Increased prenatal surveillance and early treatment of maternal complications is an approach that is appropriate for mothers who wish to continue their pregnancy with the knowledge that the baby will most likely not survive. In recent years, there have been a handful of infants with this condition who have survived long-term. Most of these infants received experimental treatment including transfusions before birth, early delivery, and even bone marrow transplantation before birth, although the latter procedure has not yet been successful. For those infants that survive to delivery, there seems to be an increased risk of developmental problems and physical effects, particularly heart and genital malformations. Otherwise, their medical outlook is similar to a child with beta thalassemia major, with the important exception that ongoing, lifelong blood transfusions begin right at birth.

Prognosis As discussed above, the prognosis for individuals with the most serious types of thalassemia has improved drastically in the last several years following recent medical advances in transfusion, chemo-, and transplantation therapy. Advances continue and promise to improve the life expectancy and quality of life further for affected individuals.

Stamatoyannopoulos, G., et. al., eds. The Molecular Basis of Blood Diseases. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1994, pp. 176-177. Weatherall, D.J. “The Thalassemias.” In Williams Hematology, edited by Ernest Beutler, et al. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995. Weatherall, D.J., et al.”The Hemoglobinopathies.” In The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, edited by Charles R. Scriver, et al. 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995. PERIODICALS

Collins, A.F., et. al. “Oral Sodium Phenlybutyrate Therapy in Homozygous Beta Thalassemia: A Clinical Trial.” Blood 85, no.1 (1995): 43-49. Dumars, K.W., et. al. “Practical Guide to the Diagnosis of Thalassemia.” American Journal of Medical Genetics 62 (1996): 29-37. Fucharoen, S., et. al. “Hydroxyurea Increases Hemoglobin F Levels and Improves the Effectiveness of Erythropoiesis in Beta-thalassemia/Hemoglobin E Disease.” Blood 87, no. 3 (1996): 887-892. Giardini, Claudio. “Treatment of ß-thalassemia.” Current Opinion in Hematology 4 (1997): 79. Glader, B.E., and K.A. Look. “Hematologic Disorders in Children from Southeast Asia.” Pediatric Hematology 43, no.3 (1996): 665-681. Lorey, F., et al. “Distribution of Hemoglobinopathy Variants by Ethnicity in a Multiethnic State.” Genetic Epidemiology 13(1996): 501-512. Olivieri, N.F., and G.M. Brittenham. “Iron-Chelating Therapy and the Treatment of Thalassemia.” Blood 89, no. 3 (1997): 739-761. Styles, L.A., et al. “Hemoglobin H-Constant Spring Disease: An Underrecognized, Severe Form of Alpha Thalassemia.” International Journal of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology 4(1997): 69-74. Weatherall, D.J. “The Thalassemias.” British Medical Journal 314 (June 7, 1997): 1675. Wilkie, A.O.M., et al. “Clinical Features and Molecular Analysis of the Alpha Thalassemia/Mental Retardation Syndromes: Cases Due to Deletions Involving Chromosome Band 16p13.3.” American Journal of Human Genetics 46 (1990): 1112-1126. Wilkie, A.O.M., et al. “Clinical Features and Molecular Analysis of the Alpha Thalassemia/Mental Retardation Syndromes: Cases Without Detectable Abnormality of the Alpha Globin Complex.” American Journal of Human Genetics 46 (1990): 1127-1140. Zeng, Y., et al. “Hydroxyurea Therapy in Beta-thalassemia Intermedia; Improvement in Haematological Parameters Due to Enhanced Beta-globin Synthesis.” British Journal of Haematology 90 (1995): 557-563.

Resources BOOKS

ORGANIZATIONS

Cohen, A., et. al. Cooley’s Anemia: Progress in Biology and Medicine. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, 1995.

Children’s Blood Foundation. 333 East 38th St., Room 830, New York, NY 10016-2745. (212) 297-4336. .

3276

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Thallium heart scan

Cooley’s Anemia Foundation, Inc. 129-09 26th Ave. #203, Flushing, NY 11354. (800) 522-7222 or (718) 321-2873. . March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation. 1275 Mamaroneck Ave., White Plains, NY 10605. (888) 663-4637. . . National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. PO Box 30105, Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 592-8573. . National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD). PO Box 8923, New Fairfield, CT 06812-8923. (203) 746-6518 or (800) 999-6673. Fax: (203) 746-6481. . OTHER

“Alpha-thalassemia Mental Retardation Syndrome, Nondeletion Type.” Online Mendelian Inheritance of Man. . (1998). Children’s Hospital Oakland, Northern California Comprehensive Thalassemia Center website. . Cooley’s Anemia Foundation, Inc. website. . Joint Center for Sickle Cell and Thalassemic Disorders website. . OTHER

Bojanowski J. “Alpha Thalassemia Major: The Possibility of Long-Term Survival.” Pamphlet from the Northern California Comprehensive Thalassemia Center. (1999).

Jennifer Bojanowski, M.S., C.G.C

A thallium scan showing many images of a human heart with cold spots. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

provides. In other words, the test may be better able to detect a problem and to differentiate one condition from another. A thallium heart scan may more accurately detect ischemic heart disease. This type of scan is most likely to be helpful in cases in which the exercise test is inconclusive, the patient cannot exercise adequately, or a quantitative evaluation of blood flow is required. In addition to evaluating coronary artery disease, thallium scanning can help to evaluate blood flow following treatment of clogged arteries with coronary artery bypass graft surgery or angioplasty.

Thallium heart scan Definition A thallium heart scan is a test using a special camera and a small amount of radioactive substance injected into the bloodstream to make an image of the blood flow to the heart.

Purpose A thallium heart scan is used to evaluate the blood supply to the heart muscle. It can identify areas of the heart that may have a poor blood supply as a result of damage from a previous heart attack or blocked coronary arteries. While exercise testing has long been a standard examination in the diagnosis of coronary artery disease, in some cases, the thallium scan may be more sensitive and more specific in the information it GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Precautions Radioisotopes such as thallium 201 should not be administered during pregnancy because they may be harmful to the fetus.

Description The thallium scan is performed in conjunction with an exercise stress test. At the end of the stress test (once the patient has reached the highest level of exercise he or she can comfortably achieve), a small amount of the harmless radioisotope thallium 201 is injected into the patient’s bloodstream through an intravenous (IV) line. The patient then lies down under a special camera called a gamma scintillation camera, which makes photographs from the gamma rays emitted by the thallium. 3277

Thallium heart scan

The thallium attaches itself to the red blood cells and is carried throughout the body in the bloodstream. It enters the heart muscle by way of the coronary arteries and collects in the cells of the heart muscle that come into contact with the blood. Since the thallium can reach only those areas of the heart with an adequate blood supply, no thallium will show up in poorly perfused areas of the heart (perfusion defects). These areas show up as “cold spots” on the thallium scan. The patient may then be given a second injection of thallium. Several hours later, the gamma scintillation camera takes more pictures in order to get an image of the heart when the patient is at rest. Cold spots that appear at rest as well as during exercise often indicate areas where the heart tissue has been damaged (for example, as a result of a prior heart attack). Sometimes perfusion is adequate during rest but cold spots appear during exercise, when the heart has to work harder and has a greater demand for blood. This can indicate some blockage in the coronary arteries, producing a condition called ischemia. In ischemia, the heart temporarily does not get enough blood flow. People with perfusion defects, especially perfusion defects that appear only during exercise, have the greatest risk of such future cardiac events as heart attacks. In recent years, there have been improvements in heart scanning. Many centers now use a single photon emission computed tomographic (SPECT) camera, which provides a clearer image. Some centers also use a type of radioactive chemical called sestamibi. Sestamibi is used along with a radioactive compound called technetium. While thallium may still be better for some uses, such as providing a better image of the heart muscle itself, sestamibi may produce clearer images in overweight patients and is more useful in assessing how well the heart pumps blood. If the patient is unable to exercise because of another medical condition, such as arthritis, he or she may be given a drug to mimic the effects of exercise on the heart. Some of these drugs include dipyridamole (Persantine), which dilates the coronary arteries; and dobutamine, which increases blood flow through the heart muscle.

Preparation Patients should not drink alcoholic or caffeinated beverages, smoke tobacco, or ingest other nicotine products for 24 hours before the test. These substances can affect test results. Patients should also not eat anything for at least three hours before the test. They may also be instructed to stop taking certain medications during the test that may interfere with test results. 3278

KEY TERMS Angioplasty—The reconstruction of damaged blood vessels. Coronary bypass surgery—Surgery in which a section of blood vessel is used to bypass a blocked coronary artery and restore an adequate blood supply to the heart muscle. Perfusion—The passage of fluid (such as blood) through a specific organ or area of the body (such as the heart). Radioisotope—A radioactive form of a chemical element, which is used in medicine for therapeutic or diagnostic purposes.

Aftercare In some cases, another set of scans may be needed, and the patient may be given special instructions regarding eating and test preparation. Otherwise, the patient is free to return to his or her normal daily activities.

Risks Radioisotopes such as thallium 201 should not be administered during pregnancy because they may be harmful to the fetus.

Normal results A normal thallium scan shows healthy blood flow through the coronary arteries and normal perfusion of the heart muscle, without cold spots, both at rest and during exercise.

Abnormal results Cold spots on the scan, where no thallium shows up, indicate areas of the heart that are not getting an adequate supply of blood. Cold spots appearing both at rest and during exercise may indicate areas where the heart tissue has been damaged. However, “reversible” cold spots appearing only during exercise usually indicate some blockage of the coronary arteries. Resources BOOKS

“Myocardial Perfusion Scan.” In The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests, ed. Barry L. Zaret, et al. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1997. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Christian, T. F., et al. “Exercise Tomographic Thallium-201 Imaging in Patients with Severe Coronary Artery Disease and Normal Electrocardiograms.” Annals of Internal Medicine 121 (1 Dec. 1994): 825-832. Rivitz, S. Mitchell, and Salvatore A. DeLuca. “Perfusion Imaging in Ischemic Heart Disease.” American Family Physician 48 (1 Nov. 1993): 1071- 1078. Simon, Harvey B., ed. “Cardiac Stress Testing: New Variations on an Old Theme.” Harvard Men’s Health Watch 1, no. 8 (Mar. 1997): 1-4. Wiley Jr., John P. “Phenomena, Comment and Notes.” Smithsonian (Oct. 1995): 28-31. Zabel, M. K., and R. M. Califf. “The Value of Exercise Thallium Imaging.” Annals of Internal Medicine 121 (1994): 891-893. ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. . National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105, Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. .

Robert Scott Dinsmoor

Thematic apperception test Definition The thematic apperception test (TAT) is a projective personality test that was designed at Harvard in the 1930s by Christiana D. Morgan and Henry A. Murray. Along with the MMPI and the Rorschach, the TAT is one of the most widely used psychological tests. A projective test is one in which a person’s patterns of thought, attitudes, observational capacity, and emotional responses are evaluated on the basis of responses to ambiguous test materials. The TAT consists of 31 pictures that depict a variety of social and interpersonal situations.The subject is asked to tell a story about each picture to the examiner. Of the 31 pictures, 10 are gender-specific while 21 others can be used with adults of either sex and with children. As of 2001, the TAT is distributed by Harcourt Brace Educational Measurement.

Purpose The original purpose of the TAT was to reveal the underlying dynamics of the subject’s personality, such as internal conflicts, dominant drives and interests, motives, etc. The specific motives that the TAT assesses include the need for achievement, need for power, the need for intimacy, and problem-solving abilities. After World War GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Apperception—The process of understanding through linkage with previous experience. Human potential movement—A movement in psychotherapy that began in the 1960s and emphasized maximizing the potential of each participant through such techniques as group therapy and sensitivity training. Projective test—A type of psychological test that assesses a person’s thinking patterns, observational ability, feelings, and attitudes on the basis of responses to ambiguous test materials. It is not intended to diagnose psychiatric disorders.

II, however, the TAT was used by psychoanalysts and clinicians from other schools of thought to evaluate emotionally disturbed patients. Another shift took place in the 1970s, when the influence of the human potential movement led many psychologists to emphasize the usefulness of the TAT in assessment services—that is, using the test to help clients understand themselves better and stimulate their personal growth. The TAT is widely used to research certain topics in psychology, such as dreams and fantasies, mate selection, the factors that motivate people’s choice of occupations, and similar subjects. It is sometimes used in psychiatric evaluations to assess disordered thinking and in forensic examinations to evaluate crime suspects, even though it is not a diagnostic test. As mentioned earlier, the TAT can be used to help people understand their own personality in greater depth and build on that knowledge in making important life decisions. Lastly, it is sometimes used as a screener in psychological evaluations of candidates for high-stress occupations (law enforcement, the military, religious ministry, etc.).

Precautions The TAT has been criticized for its lack of a standardized method of administration as well as the lack of standard norms for interpretation. Studies of the interactions between examiners and test subjects have found that the race, sex, and social class of both participants influence both the stories that are told and the way the stories are interpreted by the examiner. Attempts have been made to design sets of TAT cards for African American and for elderly test subjects, but the results have not been encouraging. In addition, the 31 standard pictures have been criticized for being too gloomy or depressing, 3279

Thematic apperception test

PERIODICALS

Therapeutic baths

and therefore limiting the range of personality characteristics that the test can assess.

Therapeutic baths Definition

Description There is no standardized procedure or set of cards for administering the TAT, except that it is a one-on-one test. It cannot be administered to groups. In one common method of administration, the examiner shows the subject only 10 of the 31 cards at each of two sessions. The sessions are not timed, but average about an hour in length.

Preparation There is no specific preparation necessary before taking the TAT, although most examiners prefer to schedule sessions (if there is more than one) over two days.

Risks The chief risks involved in taking the TAT are a bad “fit” between the examiner and the test subject, and misuse of the results.

Normal results Since the TAT is used primarily for personality assessment rather than diagnosis of mental disorders, it does not yield a “score” in the usual sense. Resources BOOKS

Arbisi, Paul A. “The Senior Apperception Technique.” In The Thirteenth Mental Measurements Yearbook, ed. J. C. Impara and B. S. Plake (Lincoln, NE: The Buros Institute of Mental Measurements, The University of NebraskaLincoln, 1998). Dana, Richard H. “Thematic Apperception Test.” In International Encyclopedia of Psychiatry, Psychology, Psychoanalysis, & Neurology, vol. 11, ed. Benjamin B. Wolman. New York: Aesculapius Publishers, Inc., 1977. Geiser, Lon, and Morris I. Stein. Evocative Images: The Thematic Apperception Test and the Art of Projection. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 1999. Sweetland, R. C., PhD, and D. J. Keyser, PhD, eds. Tests: A Comprehensive Reference for Assessments in Psychology, Education, and Business, 2nd edition. Kansas City, KS: Test Corporation of America, 1986. ORGANIZATION

American Psychological Association. 750 First Street, NE, Washington, DC 20002. (800) 374-2721. .

Rebecca J. Frey, PhD

Bathing the skin in a variety of preparations in order to remove crusts, scales, and old medications or to relieve inflammation and itching is called a therapeutic bath.

Purpose Baths or soaks (balneotherapy) are an easy way to treat a variety of skin disorders involving large areas of the skin. They relieve general aches and pains and can ease dry or oily, inflamed or itchy skin. Hot baths are relaxing and stimulating; cool baths can reduce inflammation. Therapeutic baths are useful for itchy skin, hives, sunburn, chafing, poison ivy and oak, eczema, skin irritation, and dry skin.

Precautions The temperature of the water should be comfortable. The bath should not last longer than 20–30 minutes because of the tendency of these soaks to soften and wear away the skin. A bath mat should be used, since medications may cause the floor of the tub to be slippery. Eczema and other skin diseases can be treated with an ointment that contains a derivative of coal tar. Parts of the coal tar are volatile, so the bathroom should be well ventilated.

Description The tub should be filled half-full with water at a comfortable temperature. The water should not be allowed to cool too much. If an emollient action is needed, the patient should apply a lubricating agent to the skin after the bath, since this increases hydration. Different types of therapeutic baths are used for different conditions:

Types Of Therapeutic Baths Bath Solution

Uses/benefits

Aveeno/Oatmeal

Soothes irritated skin; lubricates and softens dry skin Soothes irritated skin Treats infected skin areas; cleans and disinfects Cools and cleanses skin; decreases skin irritation Cools skin; relieves skin irritation

Corn starch Potassium permanganate Saline

Therapeutic abortion see Abortion, therapeutic 3280

Sodium bicarbonate

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Eczema—An inflammation of the skin that usually itches and sometimes forms scales or blisters.

• colloidal oatmeal (oatmeal that has been ground into a fine powder, e.g. Aveeno) coats, soothes, stops itch and doesn’t dry out the skin • potassium permanganate—a dark purple salt—makes a good disinfectant • bath oils are used to ease itchy skin and eczema as an emollient • cornstarch is a soothing, drying bath for itchy skin • sodium bicarbonate can be cooling for hot, dry skin conditions • saline (salt) water baths are used to treat lesions scattered over the body

Preparation Keep the room warm to minimize temperature fluctuations.

Aftercare After the bath, the skin should be blotted (not rubbed) carefully with a towel. The patient should wear loose, light clothing after the bath. Resources BOOKS

Boyle, Wade, and Andre Saine. Lectures in Naturopathic Hydrotherapy. East Palestine, OH: Buckeye Naturopathic Press, 1988.

Carol A. Turkington

Therapeutic drug monitoring see Drug therapy monitoring Therapeutic massage see Massage

Therapeutic touch Definition Therapeutic touch, or TT, is a noninvasive method of healing that was derived from an ancient laying-on of GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Origins Therapeutic touch was developed in 1972 by Dora Kunz, a psychic healer, and Dolores Krieger, PH.D., R.N, a nurse and professor of nursing at New York University. The year before, in 1971, when Krieger was working as a registered nurse in a hospital, she became very frustrated when one of her patients, a 30-year-old female, lay dying from a gallbladder condition. In desperation, she tried what she was learning from Kunz. Within one treatment, the patient’s condition began to shift and she lived, surprising the other hospital staff. Krieger and Kunz met during the study of Oskar Estebany, a world-renowned healer. They had invited Estebany to form a study for three years, observing his work with patients. In this study, Estebany practiced laying-on of hands healing on various patients. Using her psychic and intuitive abilities, Kunz would observe and assist in the healing, while Krieger recorded the activities of the healing session and created profiles of the patients. As the study progressed, Kunz began teaching Krieger how to heal, based on her perceptions of Estebany’s healing techniques. During her research of ancient healing methods, Krieger concluded that the energy transfer between the healer and the healee that takes place in a TT session is prana, an Eastern Indian concept representing energy, vitality, and vigor. Krieger then combined her research with Kunz’s techniques to create TT. TT was initially developed for persons in the health professions, but is currently taught worldwide to anyone who is interested in learning the technique. As of 1998, an estimated 100,000 people around the world have been trained in TT; 43,000 of those persons are health care professionals, many of whom use TT in conjunction with traditional medicine, as well as osteopathic, chiropractic, naturopathic, and homeopathic therapies. TT is taught in over 100 colleges, universities, and medical schools.

Benefits The major effects of TT are relaxation, pain reduction, accelerated healing, and alleviation of psychosomatic symptoms. Studies have shown that TT has a beneficial effect on the blood as it has the ability to raise hemoglobin values. It also affects brain waves to induce a relaxed state. TT can induce the relaxation response often within five minutes. Krieger has said that it is not individual illnesses that validate the effectiveness of TT, but rather, it is ques3281

Therapeutic touch

KEY TERMS

hands technique. In TT, the practitioner alters the patient’s energy field through an energy transfer that moves from the hands of the practitioner to the patient.

Therapeutic touch

tioned which systems are most sensitive to TT. She and others have found that the most sensitive is the autonomic nervous system (ANS), which, for example, controls urination. The ANS is followed by dysfunctions of lymphatic and circulatory systems, and then finally musculoskeletal systems. In addition, the female endocrine system is more sensitive to TT than the corresponding male system. Thus, TT helps with dysmenorrhea, amenorrhea, problems with contraception, and the course of pregnancy. TT is reported to have a positive effect on the immune system and thus accelerates the healing of wounds. Nurses use therapeutic touch in operating rooms to relax patients before surgery and in recovery rooms on postoperative patients to help speed the healing process. TT is used in the treatment of terminally ill patients, such as those with cancer and autoimmune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), to relieve anxiety and stress, create peace of mind, and reduce pain. Many nurses use TT in the nursery. The conditions of many premature babies who received TT reportedly improved rapidly. TT has been used to calm colicky infants, assist women in childbirth, and increase milk let-down in breast-feeding mothers. Other claims of TT include relief of acute pain, nausea, diarrhea, tension and migraine headaches, fever, and joint and tissue swelling. TT has been used to treat thyroid imbalances, ulcers, psychosomatic illnesses, premenstrual syndrome, Alzheimer’s disease, stroke and coma, multiple sclerosis, measles, infections, asthma, and bone and muscle injuries. Therapeutic touch is performed in many different locations, including healing centers, delivery rooms, hospitals, hospice settings, accident scenes, homes, and schools.

Description Therapeutic touch treats the whole person: relaxes the mind, heals the body, and soothes the spirit. The principle behind it is that it does not stop at the skin. The human body extends an energy field, or aura, several inches to several feet from the body. When illness occurs, it creates a disturbance or blockage in the vital energy field. The TT practitioner uses her/his hands to sense the blockage or disturbance. In a series of gentle strokes, the healer removes the disturbance and rebalances the energy to restore health. The TT session generally lasts about 20–30 minutes. Although the name is therapeutic touch, there is generally no touching of the physical body, only the energetic body or field. It is usually performed on fully clothed patients who are either lying down on a flat surface or sitting up in a chair. 3282

Each session consists of five steps. Before the session begins, the practitioner enters a state of quiet meditation in which he/she becomes centered and grounded in order to establish intent for the healing session and to garner the compassion necessary to heal. The second step involves the assessment of the person’s vital energy field. During this step, the practitioner places the palms of his/her hands 2–3 in (5–8 cm) from the patient’s body and sweeps them over the energy field in slow, gentle strokes beginning at the head and moving toward the feet. The practitioner might feel heat, coolness, heaviness, pressure, or a prickly or tingling sensation. These cues, as they are called, each signal a blockage or disturbance in the field. To remove these blockages and restore balance to the body, the practitioner then performs a series of downward sweeping movements to clear away any energy congestion and smooth the energy field. This is known as the unruffling process and is generally performed from head to feet. To prevent any energy from clinging to him/her, the practitioner shakes his/her hands after each stroke. During the next phase, the practitioner acts as a conduit to transfer energy to the patient. The energy used is not solely the energy of the practitioner. The practitioner relies on a universal source of energy so as not to deplete his/her own supply. In short, the healer acts as an energy support system until the patient’s immune system is able to take over. The practitioner then smoothes the field to balance the energy and create a symmetrical flow. When the session is over, it is recommended that the patient relax for 10–15 minutes in order for the energies to stabilize.

Side effects The side effects reported occur when an excess of energy enters the body for an extended period of time creating restlessness, irritability, and hostility, or increasing anxiety and pain. Burns are sensitive to therapeutic touch, and it is recommended that TT be performed on burned tissue for short periods, generally two to three minutes at a time.

Research and general acceptance Therapeutic touch is not generally accepted by Western medical professionals. Basic and anecdotal research has been performed on TT since its development in 1972, although little quantitative research has been carried out. It is based on a theory derived from formal research. It began as the basis of Dolores Krieger’s postdoctoral research. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Dolores Krieger, a prominent professor of nursing at the New York University Division of Nursing, conceived of therapeutic touch as a healing technique in the early 1970s and introduced the therapy in 1972. Therapeutic touch rarely consists of physical contact with the patient. The practitioner focuses positive energy through the hands, which are held or waved two to three inches away from the patient, and directs it towards the patient’s energy field. Krieger developed the technique along with a colleague, Dora Van Gelder Kunz, who is believed to be clairvoyant. They initially taught the system to graduate students at the nursing school, and it evolved from that basis. Since the introduction of therapeutic touch, Krieger traveled the world in teaching the technique before she retired as professor emerita at the university. An estimated 70,000 nurses were trained by Krieger and Kunz.

Krieger became embroiled in controversy over the potential benefits of therapeutic touch technique between 1996-98, when nine-year-old schoolgirl Emily Rosa challenged the validity of the therapy with a simple experiment. She gathered 21 practitioners and through a covered box held her hand over one of the practitioner’s own to test whether they could sense her energy field. Only 44% of the time were the practitioners able to determine which of their hands that Rosa’s was hovering over. Although Rosa contacted Krieger in 1997, Krieger refused to meet with her, refused to participate in Rosa’s experiment, and disputed the relevancy of an elementary school student’s observations. Krieger holds both an R.N. and a Ph.D. degree and dismissed the validity of the experiment due to the student’s and practitioners’ lack of experience.

In 1981 Dr. Krieger published Foundations for Holistic Health Nursing Practices. She later published a manual, The Therapeutic Touch: How to Use Your Hands to Help or to Heal, in 1992.

Krieger continues to promote her technique; her latest book, Living the Therapeutic Touch, was published by in 1999.

Dolores Krieger has performed extensive research on TT, including with pregnant women, and has noted that the following changes occur in a patient after short, consistent treatment: relaxation within the first five minutes of a session, a reduction of pain, and the acceleration of the healing process. One study was created to determine the effect TT would have on wounds that resulted from a biopsy of the upper arm. Forty-four patients placed their injured arms through a hole in a door. Twenty-two of them received TT on their arms. The other half received no treatment. The wounds treated with TT healed more quickly than the wounds that received no treatment. In 1998, a study was performed on 27 patients with osteoarthritis in at least one knee. For six weeks, the patients were treated with therapeutic touch, mock therapeutic touch, or standard care. According to The Journal of Family Practice, the journal who published the study, the results showed that the group who had received TT had “significantly decreased pain and improved function as compared with both the placebo and control groups.” Therapeutic touch can be combined with a number of different therapies, including acupressure, massage, mental imagery, physical therapy, and yoga. When combined with massage and physiotherapy, TT may reduce tension headaches, back pain, stress-related problems, circulatory problems, and constipation. Shiatsu and TT may help sinusitis, digestive disorders, muscle cramps, GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

menstrual difficulties, and insomnia. Yoga and TT may be beneficial in the treatment of bronchitis, asthma, blood pressure, fatigue, and anxiety. TT is practiced in over 70 countries worldwide: by Egyptians and Israelis during fighting in the Gaza Strip; in South Africa to reduce racial strife; and in Poland, Thailand, and the former Soviet Union.

Training and certification Therapeutic touch is taught at over 100 universities and nursing and medical schools around the United States and Canada. Although it was developed primarily for nurses, anyone can learn TT. State laws vary regarding the practice of TT. In general, laypersons are allowed to practice TT within their families. Therapeutic touch is considered an extension of health care skills, so most health care professionals are covered under the state medical practice act. Many hospitals have established policies allowing nurses and staff to perform TT on patients at no extra charge. The American Nurse’s Association often holds workshops on TT at national conventions. Therapeutic touch classes are often held for the general public through community education, healing clinics, and holistic schools. 3283

Therapeutic touch

DOLORES KRIEGER (1935– )

Thoracentesis

Resources BOOKS

Krieger, Dolores, Ph.D., R.N. Accepting Your Power to Heal. The Personal Practice of Therapeutic Touch. Bear & Company, 1993. Krieger, Dolores, Ph.D., R.N. The Therapeutic Touch. How to Use Your Hands to Help or to Heal. New York: Prentice Hall Press, 1979. Macrae, Janet, Ph.D., R.N. Therapeutic Touch: A Practical Guide. New York: Knopf, 1998. PERIODICALS

Rosa, Linda, Emily Rosa, Larry Sarner, and Stephen Barrett. “A Close Look At Therapeutic Touch.” JAMA, The Journal of the American Medical Association (April 1, 1998): 1005–11. OTHER

The Nurse Healers Professional Associates International (NHPAI), the Official Organization of Therapeutic Touch. 3760 S. Highland Dr. Salt Lake City, UT 84106. (801) 273–3399. nhpai@therapeutic-touch.org.
Jennifer Wurges

Thiabendazole see Antihelminthic drugs Thiamine deficiency see Beriberi

Symptoms of a pleural effusion include breathing difficulty, chest pain, fever, weight loss, cough, and edema. Removal of air is often an emergency procedure to prevent suffocation from pressure on the lungs. Negative air pressure within the chest cavity allows normal respiration. The accumulation of air or fluid within the pleural space can eliminate these normal conditions and disrupt breathing and the movement of air within the chest cavity. Fluid removal is performed to reduce the pressure in the pleural space and to analyze the liquid. In addition, thoracentesis was traditionally used to remove blood from the chest cavity. This is rare now that the placement of a thoracostomy tube has proven to be a more effective and safer method. Thoracentesis often provides immediate abatement of symptoms. However, fluid often begins to reaccumulate. A majority of patients will ultimately require additional therapy beyond a simple thoracentesis. There are two types of liquid in the pleural space, one having more protein in it than the other. More watery liquids are called transudates; thicker fluids are called exudates. On the basis of this difference, the cause of the effusion can more easily be determined. Transudates Thin, watery fluid oozes into the chest either because back pressure from circulation squeezes it out or because the blood has lost some of its osmotic pressure. • Heart failure creates back pressure in the veins as blood must wait to be pumped through the heart.

Thoracentesis Definition Also known as pleural fluid analysis, thoracentesis is a procedure that removes fluid or air from the chest through a needle or tube.

Purpose The lungs are lined on the outside with two thin layers of tissue called pleura. The space between these two layers is called the pleural space. Normally, there is only a small amount of lubricating fluid in this space. Liquid and/or air accumulates in this space between the lungs and the ribs from many conditions. The liquid is called a pleural effusion; the air is called a pneumothorax. Most pleural effusions are complications emanating from metastatic malignancy (movement of cancer cells from one part of the body to another). Most malignant pleural effusions are detected and controlled by thoracentesis. Thoracentesis is also performed as a diagnostic measure. In these cases, only small amounts of material need to be withdrawn. 3284

• A pulmonary embolism is a blood clot in the lung. It will create back pressure in the blood flow and also damage a part of the lung so that it leaks fluid. • Cirrhosis is a sick, scarred liver that both fails to make enough protein for the blood and also restricts the flow of blood through it. • Nephrosis is a collection of kidney disorders that change the osmotic pressure of blood and allow liquid to seep into body cavities. • Myxedema is a disease caused by too little thyroid hormone. Exudates Thicker, more viscous fluid is usually due to greater damage to tissues, allowing blood proteins as well as water to seep out. • Pneumonia, caused by viruses and by bacteria, damages lung tissue and can open the way for exudates to enter the pleural space. • Tuberculosis can infect the pleura as well as the lungs and cause them to leak liquid. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• Depending upon its size and the amount of damage it has done, a pulmonary embolism can also produce an exudate. • Several drugs can damage the lung linings as an unexpected side effect. None of these drugs is commonly used. • An esophagus perforated by cancer, trauma, or other conditions can spill liquids and even food into the chest. The irritation creates an exudate in the pleural space. • Pancreatic disease can cause massive fluid in the abdomen, which can then find its way into the chest. • Pericarditis is an inflammation of the sac that contains the heart. It can ooze fluid from both sides—into the heart’s space and into the chest. • Radiation to treat cancer or from accidents with radioactive materials can damage the pleura and lead to exudates. • A wide variety of autoimmune diseases attacks the pleura. Among these are rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). • Many other rare conditions can also lead to exudates. Blood Blood in the chest (hemothorax) is infrequently seen outside of two conditions: • major trauma can sever blood vessels in the chest, causing them to bleed into the pleural space • cancers can ooze blood as well as fluid. They do not usually bleed massively

Precautions Care must be taken not to puncture the lung when inserting the needle. Thoracentesis should never be performed by inserting the needle through an area with an infection. An alternative site needs to be found in these cases. Patients who are on anticoagulant drugs should be carefully considered for the procedure.

Description The usual place to tap the chest is below the armpit (axilla). Under sterile conditions and local anesthesia, a needle, a through-the-needle-catheter, or an over-theneedle catheter may be used to perform the procedure. Overall, the catheter techniques may be safer. Fluid or air is withdrawn. Fluid is sent to the laboratory for analysis. If the air or fluid continue to accumulate, a tube is left in place and attached to a one-way system so that it can drain without sucking air into the chest.

Preparation The location of the fluid is pinpointed through x ray or ultrasound. Ultrasound is a more accurate method when the effusion is small. A sedative may be administered in some cases but is generally not recommended. Oxygen should be given to the patient.

Aftercare As long as the tube is in the chest, the patient must lie still. After it is removed, x rays will determine if the effusion or air is reaccumulating—though some researchers and clinicians believe chest x rays do not need to be performed after routine thoracentesis.

Chyle Occasionally, the liquid that comes out of the chest is neither transparent nor bloody, but milky. This is due to a tear of the large lymphatic channel—the thoracic duct carrying lymph fluid from the intestines to the heart. It is milky because it is transporting fats absorbed in the process of digestion. The major causes of chylothorax are: • injury from major trauma, such as an automobile accident • cancers eroding into the thoracic duct Air Air in the pleural space is called pneumothorax. Air can enter the pleural space either directly through a hole between the ribs or from a hole in the lungs. Holes in the lungs are sometimes spontaneous, sometimes traumatic, and sometimes the result of disease opening a communication to the air in the lung. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Risks Reaccumulation of fluid or air is a possible complications, as are hypovolemic shock (shock caused by a lack of circulating blood) and infection. Patients are at increased risk for poor outcomes if they have a recent history of anticoagulant use, have very small effusions, have significant amounts of fluid, have poor health leading into this condition, have positive airway pressure, and have adhesions in the pleural space. A pneumothorax can sometimes be caused by the thoracentesis procedure. The use of ultrasound to guide the procedure can reduce the risk of pneumothorax. Thoracentesis can also result in hemothorax, or bleeding within the thorax. In addition, such internal structures, as the diaphragm, spleen, or liver, can be damaged by needle insertion. Repeat thoracenteses can increase the risk of developing hypoproteinemia (a decrease in the amount of protein in the blood). 3285

Thoracentesis

• Cancers of many types settle in the lungs or the pleura and leak liquids from their surface.

Thoracic outlet syndrome

Description

KEY TERMS Axilla—Armpit. Catheter—A tube that is moved through the body for removing or injecting fluids into body cavities. Hypovolemic shock—Shock caused by a lack of circulating blood. Osmotic pressure—The pressure in a liquid exerted by chemicals dissolved in it. It forces a balancing of water in proportion to the amount of dissolved chemicals in two compartments separated by a semi-permeable membrane. Pleura—Two thin layers lining the lungs on the outside.

Resources BOOKS

Celli, R. Bartolome. “Diseases of the Diaphragm, Chest Wall, Pleura and Mediastinum.” In Cecil Textbook of Medicine, edited by J. Claude Bennett. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 2000. Clinical Oncology edited by Martin D. Abeloff, et al. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 2000. Miller, Don R. “Pleural Effusion and Empyema Thoracis.” In Conn’s Current Therapy, edited by Robert E. Rakel, et al. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1998. Ross, David S. “Thoracentesis.” In Clinical Procedures in Medicine, edited by James R. Roberts, et al. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1998. PERIODICALS

Colt, Henri G. “Factors Contributing to Pneumothorax After Thoracentesis.” Chest 117 (February 2000). Petersen, W.G. “Limited Utility of Chest Radiograph After Thoracentesis.” Chest 117 (April 2000): 1038-1042.

The thoracic outlet is an area at the top of the rib cage, between the neck and the chest. Several anatomical structures pass through this area, including the esophagus, trachea, and nerves and blood vessels that lead to the arm and neck region. The area contains the first rib; collar bone (clavicle); the arteries beneath the collar bone (subclavian artery), which supply blood to the arms, a network of nerves leading to the arms (brachial plexus); and the top of the lungs. Pain and other symptoms occur when the nerves or blood vessels in this area are compressed. The likelihood of blood vessels or nerves in the thoracic outlet being compressed increases with increased size of body tissues in this area or with decreased size of the thoracic outlet. The pain of thoracic outlet syndrome is sometimes confused with the pain of angina that indicates heart problems. The two conditions can be distinguished from each other because the pain of thoracic outlet syndrome does not appear or increase when walking, while the pain of angina does. Also, the pain of thoracic outlet syndrome usually increases if the affected arm is raised, which does not happen in cases of angina. There are three types of thoracic outlet syndromes: • True neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome is caused by a compression of the nerves in the brachial plexus. Abnormal muscle or other tissue causes the problem. • Arterial thoracic outlet syndrome is caused by compression of the major artery leading to the arm, usually by a rib. • Disputed thoracic outlet syndrome describes patients who have chronic pain in the shoulders and arms and have no other disease or syndrome, but the underlying cause cannot be accurately determined. Thoracic outlet syndrome is most common in women who are 35–55 years of age.

Mark A. Mitchell

Causes and symptoms

Thoracic aortic aneurysm see Aortic aneurysm Thoracic empyema see Empyema

Thoracic outlet syndrome Definition Thoracic outlet syndromes are a group of disorders that cause pain and abnormal nerve sensations in the neck, shoulder, arm, and/or hand. 3286

Compression of blood vessels or nerves in the thoracic outlet causes pain and/or abnormal nerve sensations. Compression usually occurs at the location where the blood vessels and nerves pass out of the thoracic outlet into the arm. There are several factors that contribute to a person developing thoracic outlet syndrome. Poor posture is a major cause and is easy to treat. A person’s physical makeup also can cause thoracic outlet syndrome. For example, abnormalities of certain anatomical structures can put pressure on blood vessels or nerves. Typical abnormalities that can cause problems are malformed GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The main symptom is pain in the affected area. The patient can also develop weakness in the arm and hands, tingling nerve sensations, and a condition called Raynaud’s syndrome. In Raynaud’s syndrome, exposure to cold causes small arteries in the fingers to contract, cutting off blood flow. This causes the fingers to turn pale. In very severe cases of blood vessel compression, gangrene can result. Gangrene is the death of tissue caused by the blood supply being completely cut off. In the case of arterial thoracic outlet syndrome, the artery beneath the collar bone leading to the arm is compressed, causing the artery to increase in size. Blood clots (thrombi) may form in the blood vessel. When blood vessels are compressed, the hands, arms, and shoulders do not receive proper blood supply. They can swell and turn blue from a lack of blood. In the case of true neurogenic thoracic outlet syndrome, the nerves most affected are those of the network of nerves supplying the chest, shoulder, arm, forearm, and hand (brachial plexus). When a nerve is affected in thoracic outlet syndrome it produces a tingling sensation (paresthesia). It can also cause weakness in the hand and reduced sensation in the palm and fingers.

Diagnosis There are no specific diagnostic tests for thoracic outlet syndromes. The diagnosis is made by ruling out other diseases and by observing the patient. Two nonspecific tests that can suggest the presence of thoracic outlet syndrome are the Adsons test and the Allen test. In the Adson test, the patient takes a deep breath and tilts his or her head back and turns it to one side. The physician tests to see if the strength of the patient’s pulse is reduced in the wrist on the arm on the opposite side of the head turn. In the Allen test, the arm in which the patient is experiencing symptoms is raised and rotated while the head is turned to the opposite side. The physician tests to see if the pulse strength at the wrist is reduced. If the strength of the pulse is reduced in either of these two tests it indicates compression of the subclavian artery. Occasionally, examination with a stethoscope may reveal abnormal sounds in affected blood vessels. X rays can reveal constrictions in blood vessels if a special dye is injected into the blood stream to make the blood vessels visible (angiography). Certain tests are available to help with the diagnosis of nerve compression. These include the nerve conduction velocity test and somatosensory evoked potential test. In the nerve conduction velocity test, electrodes are placed at GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

various locations on the skin along a nerve that is being tested. A mild electrical impulse is delivered through an electrode at one end of the nerve and the electrical activity is recorded by the other electrodes. The time it takes for the electrical impulse to travel down the nerve from the stimulating electrodes to the recording electrodes is used to calculate the nerve conduction velocity. This can be used to determine if any nerve damage exists. In a somatosensory evoked potential test, electrodes are placed on the skin at the scalp, neck, shoulder, and wrist. A mild electrical impulse is delivered at the wrist, and a recording is made of the response by the brain and spinal cord. This test also can determine the presence of nerve damage.

Treatment The main treatment for thoracic outlet syndrome is physical therapy. Exercises aimed at improving the posture of the affected person are also useful. In some cases, surgery can be performed to remove the cervical rib if this is causing the problem and physical therapy has failed to work. However, surgery is generally not used to treat thoracic outlet syndrome.

Prognosis Treatment of true neurogenic and arterial thoracic outlet syndromes is usually successful. Treatment of disputed thoracic outlet syndrome is often unsuccessful. This may relate to the uncertainty of the underlying cause of the pain. Resources BOOKS

Berkow, Robert, ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. Braunwald, E. Heart Disease. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.

John T. Lohr, PhD

Thoracic surgery Definition Thoracic surgery is the repair of organs located in the thorax, or chest. The thoracic cavity lies between the 3287

Thoracic outlet syndrome

ribs and too narrow an opening between the collar bone and the first rib.

Thoracic surgery

KEY TERMS Angina—A severe constricting pain in the chest, usually caused by a lack of oxygen to the heart. Neurogenic—Caused by nerves; originating in the nerves. Subclavian—Located beneath the collarbone (clavicle).

neck and the diaphragm, and contains the heart and lungs (cardiopulmonary system), the esophagus, trachea, pleura, mediastinum, chest wall, and diaphragm.

Purpose Thoracic surgery repairs diseased or injured organs and tissues in the thoracic cavity. General thoracic surgery deals specifically with disorders of the lungs and esophagus. Cardiothoracic surgery also encompasses disorders of the heart and pericardium. Blunt chest trauma, reflux esophagitis, esophageal cancer, lung transplantation, lung cancer, and emphysema are just a few of the many clinical indications for thoracic surgery.

Precautions Patients who have blood-clotting problems (coagulopathies), and who have had previous standard thoracic surgery may not be good candidates for video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS). Because VATS requires the collapse of one lung, potential patients should have adequate respiratory function to maintain oxygenation during the procedure.

Description Thoracic surgery is usually performed by a surgeon who specializes in either general thoracic surgery or cardiothoracic surgery. The patient is placed under general anesthesia and endotracheally intubated for the procedure. The procedure followed varies according to the purpose of the surgery. An incision that opens the chest (thoracotomy) is frequently performed to give the surgeon access to the thoracic cavity. Commonly, the incision is made beginning on the back under the shoulder blade and extends in a curved arc under the arm to the front of the chest. The muscles are cut, and the ribs are spread with a retractor. The surgeon may also choose to open the chest through an incision down the breastbone, or sternum (sternotomy). Once the repair, replacement, or removal of the organ being oper3288

ated on is complete, a chest tube is inserted between the ribs to drain the wound and re-expand the lung. Video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) is a minimally invasive surgical technique that uses a thoracic endoscope (thoracoscope) to allow the surgeon to view the chest cavity. A lung is collapsed and 3-4 small incisions, or access ports, are made to facilitate insertion of the thoracoscope and the surgical instruments. During the procedure, the surgeon views the inside of the pleural space on a video monitor. The thoracoscope may be extracted and inserted through a different incision site as needed. When the surgical procedure is complete, the surgeon expands the lung and inserts a chest tube in one of the incision sites. The remaining incisions are sealed with adhesive. The thoracic surgeon may also use a mediastinoscope or a bronchoscope to explore the thoracic cavity. Mediastinoscopy allows visualization of the mediastinum, the cavity located between the lungs. The bronchoscope enables the surgeon to view the larynx, trachea, and bronchi. These instruments may be used in a separate diagnostic procedure prior to thoracic surgery, or during the surgery itself.

Preparation Except in the case of emergency procedures, candidates for general thoracic surgery should undergo a complete medical history and thorough physical examination prior to surgery. Particular attention is given to the respiratory system. The patient’s smoking history will be questioned. If the patient is an active smoker, encouragement is always given for the patient to quit smoking prior to the surgery to facilitate recovery and reduce chances of complications. Diagnostic tests used to evaluate the patient preoperatively may include, but are not limited to, X-rays, MRI, CT scans, blood gas analysis, pulmonary function tests, electrocardiography, endoscopy, pulmonary angiography, and sputum culture. Candidates for thoracic surgery should be fully educated by their physician or surgeon on what their surgery will involve, the possible risks and complications, and requirements for postoperative care. Patients are instructed not to eat 10 to 12 hours prior to a thoracic surgery procedure. A sedative may be provided to relax the patient prior to surgery. An intravenous line (IV) is inserted into the patient’s arm or neck to administer fluids and/or medication.

Aftercare After surgery, the patient is taken to the recovery room, where vital signs are monitored; depending on GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Blood gas analysis—A blood test that measures the level of oxygen, carbon dioxide, and pH in arterial blood. A blood gas analysis can help a physician assess how well the lungs are functioning.

Intubation—Insertion of an endotracheal tube down the throat to facilitate airflow to the lung(s) during thoracic surgery.

Electrocardiography—A cardiac test that measures the electrical activity of the heart.

Pleural space—The space between the pleural membranes that surround the lungs and the chest cavity.

Embolism—A blood clot, air bubble, or clot of foreign material that blocks the flow of blood in an artery. When blood supply to a tissue or organ is blocked by an embolism, infarction, or death of the tissue that the artery feeds, occurs. Without immediate and appropriate treatment, an embolism can be fatal. Emphysema—A lung disease characterized by shortness of breath and a chronic cough. Emphysema is caused by the progressive stretching and rupture of alveoli, the air sacs in the lung that oxygenate the blood. Endoscopy—The examination of organs and body cavities using a long, tubular optical instrument called an endoscope.

the procedure performed, the breathing tube may be removed. The patient typically experiences moderate to severe pain following surgery. Analgesics or other pain medication are administered to keep the patient comfortable. Chest tubes are monitored closely for signs of fluid or air accumulation in the lungs that can lead to lung collapse. A urinary catheter will remain in the patient for 24 to 48 hours to drain urine from the bladder. The hospital stay for thoracic surgery depends on the specific procedure performed. Patients who undergo a thoracotomy may be hospitalized a week or longer, while patients undergoing VATS typically have a shorter hospital stay of 2-3 days. During the recovery period, respiratory therapists and nurses work with the patient on deep breathing and coughing exercises to improve lung function.

Risks Respiratory failure, hemorrhage, nerve injury, heart attack, stroke, embolism, and infection are all possible complications of general thoracic surgery. The chest tubes used for drainage after thoracic surgery may cause a build-up of fluid or the accumulation of air in the pleural space. Both of these conditions can lead to total GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Pericardium—The sac around the heart.

Pulmonary angiography—An x-ray study of the lungs, performed by insertion of a catheter into a vein, through the heart, and into the pulmonary artery. Pulmonary angiography is performed to evaluate blood circulation to the lungs. It is also considered the most accurate diagnostic test for detecting a pulmonary embolism. Sputum culture—A laboratory analysis of the fluid produced from the lungs during coughing. A sputum culture can confirm the presence of pathogens in the respiratory system, and help to diagnose certain respiratory infections, including bronchitis, tuberculosis, and pneumonia.

lung collapse. Other specific complications may occur, depending on the procedure performed.

Normal results Normal results of thoracic surgery are dependent on the type of procedure performed and the clinical purpose of the surgery. Resources ORGANIZATIONS

American Thoracic Society. 1740 Broadway, New York, NY 10019. (212) 315-8700. .

Paula Anne Ford-Martin

Thoracoscopy Definition Thoracoscopy is the insertion of an endoscope, a narrow-diameter tube with a viewing mirror or camera attachment, through a very small incision (cut) in the chest wall. 3289

Thoracic surgery

KEY TERMS

Thoracoscopy

Purpose Thoracoscopy makes it possible for a physician to examine the lungs or other structures in the chest cavity, without making a large incision. It is an alternative to thoracotomy (opening the chest cavity with a large incision). Many surgical procedures, especially taking tissue samples (biopsies), can also be accomplished with thoracoscopy. The procedure is done to: • assess lung cancer • take a biopsy for study • determine the cause of fluid in the chest cavity • introduce medications or other treatments directly into the lungs • treat accumulated fluid, pus (empyema), or blood in the space around the lungs For many patients, thoracoscopy replaces thoracotomy. It avoids many of the complications of open chest surgery and reduces pain, hospital stay, and recovery time.

Precautions Because one lung is partially deflated during thoracoscopy, the procedure cannot be done on patients whose lung function is so poor that they do not receive enough oxygen with only one lung. Patients who have had previous surgery that involved the chest cavity, or who have bloodclotting problems, are not good candidates for this procedure. Thoracoscopy gives physicians a good but limited view of the organs, such as lungs, in the chest cavity. Endoscope technology is being refined every day, as is what physicians can accomplish by inserting scopes and instruments through several small incisions instead of making one large cut.

Description Thoracoscopy is most commonly performed in a hospital, and general anesthesia is used. Some of the procedures are moving toward outpatient services and local anesthesia. More specific names are sometimes applied to the procedure, depending on what the target site of the effort is. For example, if a physician intends to examine the lungs, the procedure is often called pleuroscopy. The procedure takes two to four hours. The surgeon makes two or three small incisions in the chest wall, often between the ribs. By making the incisions between the ribs, the surgeon minimizes damage to muscle and nerves and the ribs themselves. A tube is inserted in the trachea and connected to a ventilator, which is a mechanical device that assists the patient with inhaling and exhaling. 3290

Thoracoscopy is a procedure in which a physician can view the chest cavity and the lungs by inserting an endoscope through the chest wall.Thoracoscopy is less invasive than surgical lung biopsy. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

The most common reason for a thoracoscopy is to examine a lung that has a tumor or a metastatic growth of cancer. The lung to be examined is deflated to create a space between the chest wall and the lung. The patient breathes with the other lung with the assistance of the ventilator. A specialized endoscope, or narrow-diameter tube, with a video camera or mirrored attachment, is inserted through the chest wall. Instruments for taking necessary tissue samples are inserted through other small incisions. After tissue samples are taken, the lung is reinflated. All incisions except one are closed. The remaining open incision is used to insert a drainage tube. The tissue samples are sent to a laboratory for evaluation.

Preparation Prior to thoracoscopy, the patient will have several routine tests, such as blood, urine and chest x ray. Older patients must have an electrocardiogram (a trace record of the heart activity) because the anesthesia and the lung deflation put a big load on the heart muscle. The patient should not eat or drink from midnight the night before the thoracoscopy. The anesthesia used can cause vomiting, and, because anesthesia also causes the loss of the gag reflex, a person who vomits is in danger of moving food into the lungs, which can cause serious complications and death.

Aftercare After the procedure, a chest tube will remain in one of the incisions for several days to drain fluid and release residual air from the chest cavity. Hospital stays range from two to five days. Medications for pain are given as GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Endoscope—Instrument designed to allow direct visual inspection of body cavities, a sort of microscope in a long access tube. Thoracotomy—Open chest surgery. Trachea—Tube of cartilage that carries air into and out of the lungs.

needed. After returning home, patients should do only light lifting for several weeks.

Risks The main risks of thoracoscopy are those associated with the administration of general anesthesia. Sometimes excessive bleeding, or hemorrhage, occurs, necessitating a thoracotomy to stop it. Another risk comes when the drainage tube is removed, and the patient is vulnerable to lung collapse (pneumothorax). Resources

Description Threadworm infection, which is also called strongyloidiasis, occurs in most countries of the world but is natural to (endemic in) tropical and subtropical climates. Strongyloidiasis is less common than other parasitic infections but may affect as much as 25% of the population in some developing countries. In the United States, threadworm infection is most likely to be found among immigrants; returning travelers or military personnel; people who live in parts of Appalachia and the southeastern states; and persons in homes for the retarded and similar institutions. Human beings are universally susceptible to threadworm infection, although adults and older children are at greater risk of infection than younger children. The disease does not confer immunity. In addition to humans, threadworms can infect dogs, cats, horses, pigs, rats, and monkeys.

BOOKS

Atkinson, Lucy Jo, and Nancymarie Fortunato. Berry & Kohn’s Operating Room Technique. St. Louis: Mosby, 1996. Manncke, Klaus, and R. David Rosin. Minimal Access Thoracic Surgery. London: Chapman & Hall, 1998. “Thoracoscopy.” In Everything You Need to Know About Medical Treatments Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corp., 1996. PERIODICALS

Dardes, N., E.P. Graziani, I. Fleishman, and M. Papale. “Medical Thoracoscopy in Management of Pleural Effusions.” Chest 118, no. 4 (October 2000): 129s. Shawgo, T., T.M. Boley, and S. Hazelrigg. “The Utility of Thoracoscopic Lung Biopsy for Diagnosis and Treatment.” Chest 118, no. 4 (October 2000): 114s.

Tish Davidson, A.M.

Thoracotomy see Lung surgery; Thoracic surgery Threadworm see Enterobiasis

Threadworm infection Definition Threadworm infection is an intestinal disease, which occasionally spreads to the skin, caused by a type of parGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Causes and symptoms Threadworm infection is caused by Strongyloides stercoralis, a roundworm that lives in soil and can survive there for several generations. Mature threadworms may grow as long as 1–2 in (2.5–5 cm). The larvae have two stages in their life cycle: a rod-shaped (rhabdoid) first stage, which is not infective; and a threadlike (filariform) stage, in which the larvae can penetrate intact human skin and internal tissues. The infection is most commonly transmitted when a person comes into contact—usually by walking barefoot—with soil containing S. stercoralis larvae in their filariform stage. The threadlike larvae penetrate the skin, enter the lymphatic system, and are carried by the blood to the lungs. Once in the lungs, the larvae burst out of the capillaries into the patient’s main respiratory system. They migrate upwards—usually without symptoms—to the patient’s throat, where they are swallowed and carried down into the digestive tract. The filariform larvae settle in the small intestine. They mature into adults that deposit eggs that hatch—usually in the intestines— into noninfectious rhabdoid larvae. The rhabdoid larvae then migrate into the patient’s large intestine and are excreted in the feces. The time from initial penetration of the skin to excretion is 17–28 days. The rhabdoid larvae metamorphose into the infective filariform stage in the soil. 3291

Threadworm infection

KEY TERMS

asitic roundworm (helminth). In untreated patients, the disease has a high rate of reinfection caused by worms already present in the body. This type of disease recurrence is called autoinfection. Because of autoinfection, threadworms can remain inside humans for as long as 45 years after the initial infestation.

Threadworm infection

Threadworms are unique among human parasites in having both free-living and parasitic forms. In the freeliving life cycle, some rhabdoid larvae develop into adult worms that live in contaminated soil and produce eggs that hatch into new rhabdoid larvae. The adult worms may live as long as five years. The signs and symptoms of threadworm infection vary according to the stage of the disease as the larvae migrate throughout the body. Patients who suffer from autoinfection may have chronic or intermittent symptoms for years after they are first infected. Skin The filariform larvae usually enter the body through the skin of the feet. There may be swelling, itching, and hives at the point of entry that may be confused with insect bites. Patients with chronic threadworm infection may also develop an itchy rash on their buttocks, thighs, or abdomen. Digestive tract Although some patients may notice only mild diarrhea and cramps, others may have fever, nausea, vomiting, general weakness, and blood or mucus in their stools. The pain may mimic a stomach ulcer. Throat and lungs When the larvae migrate to the lungs and air passages, the patient may have symptoms ranging from a simple dry cough to fever, difficulty breathing, and coughing up blood or pus. Hyperinfection syndrome Hyperinfection syndrome is a potentially fatal set of complications resulting from the spread of filariform larvae to the lungs and other organ systems. It can include inflammation of the heart tissue, stomach ulcers, perforation of the intestines, blood poisoning, meningitis, shock, and eventual death. Hyperinfection syndrome is most likely to occur in patients with immune disorders or malnutrition, or in those taking anti-inflammatory corticosteroid (anti-inflammatory) medications. It has been reported in only a few AIDS patients. Autoinfection Threadworm autoinfection in humans follows two patterns. In internal autoinfection, some rhabdoid larvae in the lower bowel develop into filariform larvae that enter the bloodstream from the intestines and migrate to the lungs. In external autoinfection, the skin around the patient’s anus is infected by larvae in the feces. 3292

Diagnosis The doctor is likely to consider a diagnosis of threadworm infection when a patient has the symptoms described earlier and a history of travel or military service in areas where the disease is endemic. A definite diagnosis is made by finding rhabdoid or filariform larvae in the patient’s body fluids. The larvae may be found in fresh stool specimens or in mucus coughed up when the infection has reached the lungs. Because the larvae cannot be detected in the stools of 25% of infected patients, the string test is often performed to confirm the diagnosis. In this test, the patient swallows a weighted string which is withdrawn after four hours. The digestive juices absorbed by the string are then examined for the presence of threadworm larvae. Doctors can also use blood tests and diagnostic imaging to support the diagnosis. Between 85% and 95% of patients with threadworm infections will have a measurable level of antibodies in their blood, even though these antibodies do not prevent the disease from spreading. In addition, patients with severe infections often have unusually high levels of white cells in their blood. X rays of the intestines or the chest often help in locating specific areas of inflamed or ulcerated tissue.

Treatment Threadworm infections are treated with medications. The drugs most often given are ivermectin, thiabendazole (Mintezol), and albendazole. Ivermectin is generally preferred because it has fewer side effects than thiabendazole. These drugs, which are taken by mouth over a period of two to seven days, work by preventing the development of eggs and new larvae. Patients with severe infections should be given protein replacement, blood transfusions, and fluids to replace losses from nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Patients who are taking corticosteroids should be carefully evaluated if they have symptoms of threadworm infection, because these medications encourage the development of hyperinfection syndrome.

Prognosis The prognosis for complete recovery is good for most patients, except those with hyperinfection syndrome or severe protein loss.

Prevention There is no effective immunization against threadworm infection. Prevention of the disease requires careful attention to personal and institutional hygiene in GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Antibody—A protein molecule produced by the immune system that is specific to a disease agent, such as threadworm larvae. The severity of a patient’s infection can be measured from the level of antibody in the blood. Autoinfection—An infection caused by a disease agent that is already present in the body. Corticosteroid—A class of drugs based on hormones formed in the adrenal gland, used to reduce inflammation. They increase the likelihood of hyperinfection syndrome in patients with threadworm infection.

Rebecca J. Frey, PhD

Endemic—Natural to or characteristic of a particular place, population, or climate. Threadworm infections are endemic in the tropics. Filariform—Threadlike in appearance, like the infectious stage of the threadworm larva. Helminth—A type of parasitic worm. Threadworms belong to a subcategory of helminths called nematodes, or roundworms. Hyperinfection syndrome—A condition of massive infection in which threadworm larvae multiply rapidly and spread throughout the body. It is usually associated with damage to the immune system, the use of steroid medications, or malnutrition. Rhabdoid—Rod- or wand-shaped, like the first stage of the threadworm larva. String test—A test performed to diagnose threadworm infection. The patient is asked to swallow a weighted string that absorbs stomach juices, which can be analyzed for the presence of threadworm larvae.

endemic areas, including handwashing after defecating and before handling food. Other precautions include wearing shoes when visiting countries with high rates of threadworm infection, and monitoring close contacts of patients for signs of infection. Resources BOOKS

Genta, Robert M. “Strongyloidiasis.” In Encyclopedia of Immunology. Vol. 3. Ed. Ivan M. Roitt and Peter J. Delves. London, UK: Academic Press, 1992. Goldsmith, Robert S. “Infectious Diseases: Protozoal & Helminthic.” In Current Medical Diagnosis and TreatGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Throat culture Definition A throat culture is a technique for identifying disease bacteria in material taken from the throat. Most throat cultures are done to rule out infections caused by beta-hemolytic streptococci, which cause strep throat. Hemolytic means that these streptococci destroy red blood cells.

Purpose The primary purpose of a throat culture is identification of the specific organisms that cause strep throat. These organisms are Group A streptococci, specifically Streptococcus pyogenes. Since most sore throats are caused by viral infections rather than by S. pyogenes, a correct diagnosis is important to prevent unnecessary use of antibiotics and to begin treatment of strep infections as soon as possible. Group A streptococcal infections are potentially life-threatening, often involving other parts of the body in addition to the throat. Besides causing sore throat (pharyngitis), streptococci can also cause scarlet fever, rheumatic fever, kidney disease, or abscesses around the tonsils. Throat cultures can also be used to identify other disease organisms that are present in the patient’s throat; and to identify people who are carriers of the organisms that cause meningitis and whooping cough. Besides their use in diagnosis, throat cultures are sometimes used to test antibiotics for their effectiveness in treating different infections. 3293

Throat culture

KEY TERMS

ment, 1998. 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. “Infectious Disease: Parasitic Infections.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. McCarthy, James S., and Thomas B. Nutman. “Parasitic Diseases of the Skin.” In Conn’s Current Therapy, 1996, ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Phillips, Elizabeth, and Jay S. Keystone. “Intestinal Parasites.” In Conn’s Current Therapy, 1996, ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Weinberg, Adriana, and Myron J. Levin. “Infections: Parasitic & Mycotic.” In Current Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment, ed. William W. Hay Jr., et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997.

Throat culture

area that appears either very red or discharging pus. The swab is removed gently without touching the teeth, gums, or tongue. It is then placed in a sterile tube for immediate delivery to a laboratory. Obtaining the specimen takes less than 30 seconds. Laboratory results are usually available in two to three days. The swabbing procedure may cause gagging but is not painful. The doctor makes a note for the laboratory to indicate if any disease organisms other than strep are suspected, because some require special growth conditions in the laboratory.

This nurse is taking a throat culture from a patient for laboratory analysis. (Photograph by David Weinstein & Associates, Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

Precautions Throat cultures should be taken before the patient is given any antibiotic medications. In addition, the patient’s immunization history should be checked to evaluate the possibility that diseases other than strep are causing the sore throat. The care provider should wash the hands carefully after taking the specimen to prevent the spread of any infectious organisms.

S. pyogenes is cultured on a growth medium called blood agar. Agar is a gel that is made from the cell walls of red algae. Blood agar is made from agar gel and sheep’s blood. When the throat swab reaches the laboratory, it is wiped across a blood agar plate. The plate is allowed to incubate for 24–48 hours to allow the growth of bacteria. If the organism is a Group A hemolytic streptococcus, the area immediately around the bacterial colony will be cleared of red blood cells. Hemolytic streptococci dissolve (lyse) red blood cells, leaving a clear zone surrounding the colony. Alternative procedures So-called instant strep tests are now available to help diagnose strep throat. They can be used in the doctor’s office and take about 10–30 minutes to perform. Instant tests detect an antigen associated with the streptococcus. These tests are relatively new and not available at all clinics. Their reliability has improved since they were first introduced. If an instant throat test is negative, however, a standard throat culture can be performed to verify the results.

Preparation Description A throat culture test should be done on anyone who has symptoms of a strep throat. These symptoms include a sore throat that may be accompanied by a fever, body aches, and loss of appetite. Age is a consideration, in that strep throat is more common in children than in adults. The tonsils and the back of the throat often appear red, swollen, and streaked with pus. These symptoms usually appear one to three days after being exposed to group A strep. Because strep is highly contagious, family members and close contacts of patients diagnosed with strep throat should also have throat cultures performed if they show signs of the disease. The specimen for throat culture is obtained by wiping the patient’s throat with a cotton swab. The patient is asked to tilt the head back and open the mouth wide. With the tongue depressed and the patient saying “ah,” the care provider wipes the back of the throat and the tonsils with a sterile swab. The swab is applied to any 3294

The patient does not need to avoid food or fluids before the test. Recent gargling or treatment with antibiotics, however, will affect the culture results. The laboratory should be notified if the patient has been recently taking antibiotic medications.

Aftercare No specific aftercare is needed.

Risks There is a minor risk for the health professional of exposure to the patient’s illness.

Normal results Normal results would include finding organisms that grow in healthy throat tissues. These organisms include GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Agar—A gel made from red algae that is used to culture certain disease agents in the laboratory.

American Medical Association. 515 N. State St., Chicago, IL 60612. (312) 464-5000. . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404) 639-3311. .

Antibiotic—A drug given to stop the growth of bacteria. Antibiotics are ineffective against viruses.

Cindy L. A. Jones, PhD

Antigen—A substance that interacts with an antibody and causes an immune reaction. Carrier—A person harboring an infectious disease who may be immune to it but who can give it to others.

Thromboangiitis obliterans see Buerger’s disease Thrombocyte count see Platelet count

Diphtheria—A serious disease caused by a bacterium, Corynebacterium diphtheriae. Hemolytic—Able to dissolve red blood cells. The bacteria that cause strep throat are hemolytic organisms. Streptococcus—A category (genus) of sphereshaped bacteria that occur in pairs or chains. Thrush—A disease occurring in the mouth or throat that is caused by a yeast, Candida albicans. Whooping cough—An infectious disease of the respiratory tract caused by a bacterium, Bordetella pertussis.

non-hemolytic and alpha-hemolytic streptococci, some Neisseria species, staphylococci, diphtheria and hemophilus organisms, pneumococci, yeasts, and Gram-negative rods.

Abnormal results In addition to S. pyogenes, other disease agents may be identified in the throat culture. Infectious agents that can be identified include Candida albicans, which can cause thrush; Corynebacterium diphtheriae, which can cause diphtheria; and Bordetella pertussis, which can cause whooping cough. In addition, the appearance of a normal organism in very high numbers may also be regarded as an abnormal result. Resources BOOKS

“Throat Culture.” In Illustrated Guide to Diagnostic Tests, ed. J. A. Lewis. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corp. 1994. PERIODICALS

Perkins, A. “An Approach to Diagnosing the Acute Sore Throat.” American Family Physician 55 (Jan. 1997): 131-137. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Thrombocytopenia Definition Thrombocytopenia is an abnormal drop in the number of blood cells involved in forming blood clots. These cells are called platelets.

Description Thrombocytopenia is a blood disease characterized by an abnormally low number of platelets in the bloodstream. The normal amount of platelets is usually between 150,000 and 450,000 cells per microliter of blood. A microliter is an amount equal to one one-millionth of a liter (a liter is almost equal to a quart). Platelet numbers are counted by having a blood sample collected and placing a measured amount of blood in a machine called a cell counter. When the platelet number drops below 150,000 cells per microliter of blood, this person is said to be thrombocytopenic.

Causes and symptoms Abnormal reductions in the number of platelets are caused when abnormalities occur in any of the following three processes: decreased platelet production by the bone marrow; increased trapping of platelets by the spleen; or a more rapid than normal destruction of platelets. Persons with this condition easily bruise and can have episodes of excess bleeding (a hemorrhage). Platelets come from megakaryocytes, which are produced in the material located within the center cavity of the bones (bone marrow). When abnormalities develop in the marrow, the marrow cells can lose their ability to produce platelets in correct amounts. The result is a lower than normal level of platelets in the blood. Drugs used in cancer chemotherapy can cause the marrow to mal3295

Thrombocytopenia

ORGANIZATIONS

Thrombocytopenia

function in this way, as can the presence of tumor cells in the marrow itself. Normally, the spleen holds about one-third of the body’s platelets as part of this organ’s function to recycle aging or damaged red blood cells (the cells that carry oxygen in the blood). When liver disease or cancer of the spleen is present, the spleen can enlarge, resulting in a greater number of platelets staying in the organ. This condition results in abnormally low numbers of platelets in the blood. Platelets can break down in unusually high amounts in persons with abnormalities in their blood vessel walls; with blood clots; or with man-made replacement heart valves. Devices placed inside blood vessels to keep them from closing (stents) due to weakened walls or fat buildup can also cause platelets to break down. In addition, infections and other changes in the immune system can speed up the removal of platelets from the circulation.

Diagnosis Thrombocytopenia is diagnosed by having a blood sample taken and counting the platelets present in the sample. However, accurately determining the medical reason for this conditions is complex. Once a low platelet count is verified, a careful evaluation of the function of the bone marrow and spleen are necessary. Improper functioning of either or both of these organs can cause thrombocytopenia. In addition, the causes for the abnormal spleen or marrow function must be investigated since different cancers, blood disorders, or liver disease can be the true cause for the drop in platelets found in the blood.

Treatment If low platelet counts are caused by an enlarged spleen, removal of the spleen can help raise the platelet level, since the spleen is no longer there to capture the platelets. However, proper treatment for what causes the enlarged spleen is necessary as well. Low platelet counts can indicate more serious conditions. If a dysfunctional immune system is found to be the cause for this condition, drugs like steroids or gamma globulin can be used to help maintain platelet levels in certain cases. If low platelet levels are due to an abnormally low level of platelet production, transfusions of platelets can be given as well.

Prognosis Thrombocytopenia can result in fatal bleeding, but it also can indicate various other, more serious, cancers and 3296

KEY TERMS Gamma globulin—One of a group of proteins found in the blood that is involved in helping the body fight infections. Stent—A man-made surgical device, usually tubeshaped, that is placed into a blood vessel to keep it from closing. Transfusion—The transfer of blood from one person to another. Transfusions can be direct, in which blood is transferred from the donor to the recipient; or indirect, in which the blood is taken from the donor, stored in a container, and then given to the recipient.

disorders that affect the blood cells. This condition requires thorough medical evaluation.

Prevention There is no known way to prevent thrombocytopenia. Resources BOOKS

Handin, Robert I. “Disorders of the Platelet and Vessel Wall.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. PERIODICALS

Sadovsky, Richard. “Management of Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia.” American Family Physician 55 (1 May 1997): 2310. Winkelstein, Alan, and Joseph E. Kiss. “Immunohematologic Disorders.” Journal of the American Medical Association 278 (10 Dec. 1997): 1982. ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. .

Dominic De Bellis, PhD

Thrombocytosis Definition Thrombocytosis is a blood disorder in which the body produces a surplus of platelets (thrombocytes). GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Thrombocytosis is an abnormally increased number of platelets in the blood. Platelets are blood cells that stick together, helping blood to clot. Thrombocytosis is a condition that may have many causes. Throbocytosis is classified as one of two types. Secondary thrombocytosis can be traced to another cause, such as inflammation, severe bleeding, iron deficiency, or some cancers. Primary thrombocytosis (or essential thrombocythemia) is a single disease entity, with unique clinical characteristics.

Causes and symptoms The cause of essential thrombocytosis is unknown. Secondary thrombocytosis may develop as a result of: • acute hemorrhage or infection • anemia • arthritis and other chronic inflammations

• prolonged bleeding after having surgery or after having a tooth pulled • redness or tingling of the hands and feet • weakness. In rare instances, the lymph nodes become enlarged The highest platelet counts usually produce the most severe symptoms. Younger patients (especially women) may not have symptoms, even though their platelet counts are very high. Complications Complications of thrombocytosis include stroke, heart attack, and formation of blood clots in the arms and legs. A doctor should be notified whenever bleeding is unexplained or prolonged or the patient develops: • chest or leg pain • confusion

• cancer

• numbness

• exercise

• weakness

• iron deficiency • medication • osteoporosis • removal of the spleen (splenectomy) • polycythemia vera (a disorder affecting other red blood cells, as well as platelets) • stress • surgery Symptoms Two of every three patients who have thrombocytosis do not have any symptoms of the disease at the time of diagnosis. Younger patients may remain symptom-free for years. Enlargement of the spleen is detected in 60% of patients with thrombocytosis. The liver may also be enlarged. As many as half of all patients experience bleeding from the skin, gums, or nose; and 20–50% have some blockage of veins or arteries. Other symptoms of thrombocytosis include: • bloody stools • bruising • dizziness • headache • hemorrhage GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Diagnosis The patient’s symptoms suggest the presence of thrombocytosis. Blood tests confirm the diagnosis. Bone marrow aspiration (removal of a tissue sample for microscopic examination) may also be performed.

Treatment The key to treating secondary thrombocytosis is treating the underlying condition. Any patient who has thrombocytosis should be encouraged not to smoke. In young people who have no symptoms, this condition can remain stable for many years. These patients should be monitored by a physician, but may not require treatment. Treatment for patients who do have symptoms focuses on controlling bleeding, preventing the formation of blood clots, and lowering platelet levels. Treatment for secondary thrombocytosis involves treating the condition or disease responsible for excess platelet production. In 1997, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved the use of anagrelide HCl (Agrylin) to reduce elevated platelet counts and decrease the risk of clot formation. Some patients have benefited from the use of hydroxyurea, an anti-cancer drug. 3297

Thrombocytosis

Description

Thrombolytic therapy

Low doses of aspirin may prevent clotting, but can cause serious hemorrhages. If drug therapy does not bring platelet counts down to an acceptable level as rapidly as necessary, plateletpheresis may be performed. Usually combined with drug therapy and used primarily in medical emergencies, this procedure consists of: • withdrawing blood from the patient’s body • removing platelets from the blood • returning the platelet-depleted blood to the patient

Prognosis Many patients with thrombocytosis remain free of complications for long periods. However, some patients may die as a result of blood clots or uncontrolled bleeding.

Prevention There is no known way to prevent thrombocytosis.

that are served by that blood vessel. This can cause serious damage to those parts of the body. If the clot forms in an artery that supplies blood to the heart, for example, it can cause a heart attack. A clot that cuts off blood to the brain can cause a stroke. Thrombolytic therapy is used to dissolve blood clots that could cause serious, and possibly life-threatening, damage if they are not removed. Research suggests that when used to treat stroke, thrombolytic therapy can prevent or reverse paralysis and other problems that otherwise might result. Thrombolytic therapy also is used to dissolve blood clots that form in tubes put into people’s bodies for medical treatments, such as dialysis or chemotherapy.

Description Thrombolytic therapy uses drugs called thrombolytic agents, such as alteplase (Activase), anistreplase (Eminase), streptokinase (Streptase, Kabikinase), urokinase (Abbokinase), and tissue plasminogen activator (TPA) to dissolve clots. These drugs are given as injections, only under a physician’s supervision.

Resources

Recommended dosage

BOOKS

Berkow, Robert, ed. The Merck Manual of Medical Information: Home Edition. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck & Co., Inc., 1997. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. OTHER

Precautions

“FDA Approves Marketing of Agrylin for Thrombocythemia.” 31 May 1998 . “Primary Thrombocythemia.” The Meck Page. 3 June 1998 . “Primary Thrombocythemia.” HealthAnswers.com 31 May 1998 .

Maureen Haggerty

Thromboembolism see Embolism

Thrombolytic therapy Definition Thrombolytic therapy is the use of drugs that dissolve blood clots.

Purpose When a blood clot forms in a blood vessel, it may cut off or severely reduce blood flow to parts of the body 3298

The physician supervising thrombolytic therapy decides on the proper dose for each patient. He or she will take into account the type of drug, the purpose for which it is being used, and in some cases, the patient’s weight.

For thrombolytic therapy to be effective in treating stroke or heart attack, prompt medical attention is very important. The drugs must be given within a few hours of the beginning of a stroke or heart attack. However, this treatment is not right for every patient who has a heart attack or a stroke. Only a qualified medical professional can decide whether a thrombolytic agent should be used. To increase the chance of survival and reduce the risk of serious, permanent damage, anyone who has signs of a heart attack or stroke should get immediate medical help. Thrombolytic therapy may cause bleeding. Usually this is not serious, but severe bleeding does occur in some people. This is especially likely in older people. To lower the risk of serious bleeding, people who are given this drug should move around as little as possible and should not try to get up on their own unless told to do so by a health care professional. Following all the instructions of the health care providers in charge is very important. Thrombolytic therapy may be more likely to cause serious bleeding in people who have certain medical conditions or have recently had certain medical procedures. Before being given a thrombolytic agent, anyone with GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• blood disease or current or past bleeding problems in any part of the body • heart or blood vessel disease • stroke (recent or in the past) • high blood pressure • brain tumor or other brain disease • stomach ulcer or colitis • severe liver disease • active tuberculosis • recent falls, injuries, or blows to the body or head • recent injections into a blood vessel • recent surgery, including dental surgery • tubes recently placed in the body for any reason • recent delivery of a baby In addition, anyone who has had a recent streptococcal (strep) infection should tell the physician in charge. Some thrombolytic agents may not work properly in people who have just had a strep infection, so the physician may want to use a different drug. People who take certain medicines may be at greater risk for severe bleeding when they are given a thrombolytic agent.

KEY TERMS Arteries—Blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart to the cells, tissues, and organs of the body. Blood clot—A hard mass that forms when blood gels. Chemotherapy—Treatment of an illness with chemical agents. The term is usually used to describe the treatment of cancer with drugs. Dialysis—A process used in people whose kidneys are not working well. By way of a filtering machine, dialysis separates waste and other useless materials from the blood—a job the kidneys usually do. Paralysis—Loss of the ability to move one or more parts of the body. Stroke—A serious medical event in which blood flow to the brain is stopped. This may be because of a blood clot in an artery or because an artery has burst. Strokes may cause paralysis and changes in speech, memory, and behavior.

• coughing up blood

Women who are pregnant should tell the physician in charge before being given a thrombolytic agent. There is a slight chance that a woman who is given thrombolytic therapy during the first spell months of pregnancy will have a miscarriage. However, streptokinase and urokinase have both been used without problems in pregnant women.

• vomiting blood or material that looks like coffee grounds

After being treated with thrombolytic therapy, women who are breastfeeding should check with their physicians before starting to breastfeed again.

• sudden, severe, or constant headaches

• nosebleeds • unexpected or unusually heavy vaginal bleeding • dizziness • pain or swelling in the abdomen or stomach • back pain or backache

Side effects Anyone who has fever or who notices bleeding or oozing from their gums, from cuts, or from the site where the thrombolytic agent was injected should immediately tell their health care provider. People who are given thrombolytic therapy should also be alert to the signs of bleeding inside the body and should check with a physician immediately if any of the following symptoms occur: • blood in the urine • blood or black, tarry stools • constipation GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• severe or constant muscle pain or stiffness • stiff, swollen, or painful joints Other side effects of thrombolytic agents are possible. Anyone who has unusual symptoms during or after thrombolytic therapy should tell a health care professional.

Interactions People who take certain medicines may be at greater risk for severe bleeding when they receive a thrombolytic agent. Anyone who is given a thrombolytic agent should tell the physician in charge about all other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines he or she is 3299

Thrombolytic therapy

any of these problems or conditions should tell the physician in charge about it:

Thrombophlebitis

taking. Among the medicines that may increase the chance of bleeding are: • aspirin and other medicines for pain and inflammation • blood thinners (anticoagulants) • antiseizure medicines, such as Depakote (divalproex) and Depakene (valproic acid) • cephalosporins, such as cefamandole (Mandol), cefoperazone (Cefobid), and Cefotetan (Cefotan) Also, anyone who has been treated with anistreplase or streptokinase within the past year should tell the physician in charge. These drugs may not work properly if they are given again, so the physician may want to use a different thrombolytic agent. Nancy Ross-Flanigan

Thrombophlebitis Definition Thrombophlebitis is the inflammation of a vein with blood clot formation inside the vein at the site of inflammation. Thrombophlebitis is also known as phlebitis, phlebothrombosis, and venous thrombosis.

Causes and symptoms The main symptoms are tenderness and pain in the area of the affected vein. Redness and/or swelling may also be seen. In the case of deep venous thrombosis, there is more swelling than is caused by superficial thrombophlebitis, and the patient may experience muscle stiffness in the affected area. There are many causes of thrombophlebitis. The main causes can be grouped into three categories; injury to blood veins, increased blood clotting, and blood stasis. When blood veins are damaged, collagen in the blood vein wall is exposed. Platelets respond to collagen by initiating the clotting process. Damage to a vein can occur as a consequence of indwelling catheters, trauma, infection, Buerger’s disease, or the injection of irritating substances. Increased tendency of the blood to clot can be caused by malignant tumors, genetic disorders, and oral contraceptives. Stasis, in which the blood clots due to decreased blood flow in an area, can happen following surgery, as a consequence of varicose veins, as a complication of postpartum states, and following prolonged bed rest. In the case of prolonged bed rest, blood clots form because of inactivity, which allows blood to move sluggishly and stagnate (collect) in blood veins. This can lead to blood clots. These clots (also called emboli) are sometimes released when the patient stands up and resumes activity. This can present a problem if the emboli lodge in vital organs. In the case of postpartum patients, a fever developing four to 10 days after delivery may indicate thrombophlebitis.

Description There are two parts to thrombophlebitis, inflammation of a vein and blood clot formation. If the inflammation component is minor, the disease is usually called venous or phlebothrombosis. Thrombophlebitis can occur in both deep veins and superficial veins, but most often occurs in the superficial veins of the extremities (legs and arms). Most cases occur in the legs. When thrombophlebitis occurs in a superficial vein, one that is near the surface of the skin and is visible to the eye, the disease is called superficial thrombophlebitis. Any form of injury to a blood vessel can result in thrombophlebitis. In the case of superficial thrombophlebitis, the blood clot usually attaches firmly to the wall of the affected blood vein. Since superficial blood veins do not have muscles that massage the veins, blood clots in superficial veins tend to remain where they form and seldom break loose. When thrombophlebitis occurs in a deep vein, a vein that runs deep within muscle tissue, it is called deep venous thrombosis. Deep venous thrombosis presents the threat of producing blood clots that will break loose to form emboli. These can lodge in other tissues where they can block the blood supply, typically in the lungs. This results in tissue damage and can sometimes be serious or fatal; for example, pulmonary embolism. 3300

Diagnosis In superficial thrombophlebitis, the location of the clot can sometimes be seen by the unaided eye. Blood clots are hard and can usually be detected by a physician using palpation (massage). Deep venous thrombosis requires specialized diagnostic instruments to detect the blood clot. Among the instruments a physician may use are ultrasound and x ray, coupled with dye injection (venogram).

Treatment Superficial thrombophlebitis usually resolves without treatment. If treatment of superficial thrombophlebitis is given, it is usually limited to the application of heat or anti-inflammatory drugs, like aspirin or ibuprofen, which also help to relieve the pain. It can take from several days to several weeks for the clot to resolve and the symptoms to completely disappear. Rarely, anticoagulant drugs may be administered. Deep venous thrombosis is a serious condition and is treated with anticoagulant drugs and by keeping the affected limb elevated. The primary objective in treating deep venous thromGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Prognosis Superficial thrombophlebitis seldom progresses to a serious medical complication, although non-lethal embolisms may be produced. Deep venous thrombosis may lead to embolism, especially pulmonary embolism. This is a serious consequence of deep venous thrombosis, and is sometimes fatal. Resources BOOKS

Alexander, R. W., R. C. Schlant, and V. Fuster, eds. The Heart. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998. Berkow, Robert, ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. Larsen, D. E., ed. Mayo Clinic Family Health Book. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc., 1996.

John T. Lohr, PhD

Thrush see Candidiasis Thymol see Antiseptics

KEY TERMS Emboli, embolus—Emboli is the plural form of embolus. Embolus is any mass of air, blood clot, or foreign body that travels through the blood stream and is capable of lodging in smaller blood vessels where they obstruct the blood flow to that vessel. Embolism—The obstruction of a blood vessel by a blot clot. Phlebitis—Inflammation of a vein. Thrombus—A blood clot that forms within a blood vessel or the heart.

Description The thymus is located in the upper chest just below the neck. It is a small organ that produces certain types of white blood cells before birth and during childhood. These white blood cells are called lymphocytes and are an important part of the body‘s immune system. Once released from the thymus, lymphocytes travel to lymph nodes where they help to fight infections. The thymus gland becomes smaller in adulthood and is gradually taken over by fat tissue. Although rare, thymomas are the most common type of thymic cancer. They arise from thymic epithelial cells, which make up the covering of the thymus. Thymomas frequently contain lymphocytes, which are noncancerous. Thymomas are classified as either noninvasive (previously called “benign”) or invasive (previously called “malignant”). Noninvasive thymomas are those in which the tumor is encapsulated and easy to remove. Invasive thymomas have spread to nearby structures (such as the lungs) and are difficult to remove. Approximately 30% to 40% of thymomas are of the invasive type. Thymoma affects men and women equally. It is usually diagnosed between the ages of 40 and 60 years. Thymomas are uncommon in children.

Causes and symptoms

Thymoma Definition Thymomas are the most common tumor of the thymus. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The cause of thymoma is unknown. Cancer is caused when the normal mechanisms that control cell growth become disturbed, causing the cells to continually grow without stopping. This is caused by damage to the DNA in the cell. Approximately 40% of the patients diagnosed with thymoma have no symptoms. The symptoms in the 3301

Thymoma

bosis is prevention of a pulmonary embolism. The patient usually is hospitalized during initial treatment. The prescribed anticoagulant drugs limit the ability of blood clots to grow and new clots to form. Sometimes, a drug that dissolves blood clots is administered. These drugs must be used with caution because, as the clot dissolves, it may release from the site where it formed and become an embolus. Surgery may be used if the affected vein is likely to present a long term threat of producing blood clots that will release emboli. When superficial thrombophlebitis occurs in the groin, where the superficial veins join the deep veins, the threat of emboli is present. In this case, blood clots formed in the superficial veins can extend into the much larger deep vein where they break off and are released into the blood stream. The affected veins are either removed or tied off to prevent the release of the blood clots. Tying off superficial blood veins is an outpatient procedure that can be performed with local anesthesia. The patient is capable of immediately resuming normal activities.

Thymoma

remaining 60% of patients are caused by pressure from the enlarged thymus on the windpipe (trachea) or blood vessels, or by paraneoplastic syndromes. Paraneoplastic syndromes are collections of symptoms in cancer patients that cannot be explained by the tumor. Seventyone percent of thymomas are associated with paraneoplastic syndromes. The most common syndromes related to thymoma are pure red cell aplasia (having abnormally low levels of red blood cells), myasthenia gravis (a muscular disorder), and hypogammaglobulinemia (having abnormally low levels of antibodies). These conditions are autoimmune diseases—those in which the body mounts an attack against certain normal cells of the body. Symptoms of thymoma may include: • shortness of breath • swelling of the face • coughing • chest pain • muscle weakness (especially in the eyes, neck, and chest, causing problems with vision, swallowing, and breathing) • weakness • dizziness • shortness of breath • fatigue

Diagnosis The physician will conduct a complete physical exam. He or she may be able to feel a fullness in the lower neck region. Routine blood tests may be performed. Imaging studies are necessary because the symptoms of thymoma can be caused by many other diseases. Thymomas can be identified by chest x ray, magnetic resonance imaging, and computed tomography. A biopsy may be performed, in which a small sample of the tumor is removed and examined under the microscope. However, because of the risk of “seeding” cancerous cells, biopsies are not routinely performed. There are a few different methods to biopsy a thymoma. For a mediastinoscopy, a wand-like lighted camera (endoscope) and special instruments are passed through a small cut in the lower neck. The surgeon can see the tumor on a monitor and can cut off small samples for microscopic analysis. Mediastinoscopy is performed under general anesthesia. Alternatively, a needle biopsy will be taken in which a long needle is passed through the skin and into the tumor. Fine needle biopsy uses a thin needle and larger-core needle biopsy uses a wider 3302

needle. Needle biopsies may be performed in conjunction with CT imaging. Patients who are having difficulty breathing may have a bronchoscopy performed to examine the wind pipe. An endoscope, in this case a bronchoscope, is inserted through the mouth and into the windpipe. The physician will look for tumors and may perform biopsies.

Treatment Clinical staging There is more than one type of staging system for thymoma; but the Masaoka system, a surgical staging system developed in 1981, is used most often. Thymoma is categorized into four stages (I, II, III, and IV), which may be further subdivided (A and B) based on the spread of cancerous tissue. The Masaoka staging system is as follows: • Stage I. The thymoma lies completely within the thymus. • Stage II. The thymoma has spread out of the thymus and invaded the outer layer of the lung (pleura) or nearby fatty tissue. • Stage III. The thymoma has spread to other neighboring tissues of the upper chest, including the outer layer of the heart (pericardium), the lungs, or the heart‘s main blood vessels. • Stage IVA. The thymoma has spread throughout the pericardium and/or the pleura. • Stage IVB. The thymoma has spread to organs in other parts of the body. In 1999, the World Health Organization (WHO) adopted a new classification system for thymic tumors. This system is a histologic classification, which means that it is based on the microscopic features of the cells that make up the tumor. The WHO classification system ranks thymomas into types A, AB, B1, B2, B3, and C, by increasing severity. The treatment for thymoma depends on the stage of cancer and the patients overall health. Because thymomas are so rare, there are no defined treatment plans. Treatment options include surgery, radiation therapy, and/or chemotherapy. Surgical removal of the tumor is the preferred treatment. Surgery is often the only treatment required for stage I tumors. Treatment of thymoma often relieves the symptoms caused by paraneoplastic syndromes. A treatment that is intended to aid the primary treatment is called adjuvant therapy. For instance, chemotherGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Surgery Thymoma may be treated by surgically removing (resecting) the tumor and some of the nearby healthy tissue. Removal of the entire thymus gland is called a thymectomy. Surgery on the thymus is usually performed through the chest wall by splitting open the breast bone (sternum), a procedure called a median sternotomy. When complete removal of the tumor is impossible, the surgeon will remove as much of the tumor as possible (debulking surgery, subtotal resection). In these cases, If the tumor has spread, surgery may include removal of such other tissues as the pleura, pericardium, blood vessels of the heart, lung, and nerves. Radiation therapy Radiation therapy uses high-energy radiation from x rays and gamma rays to kill the cancer cells. Radiation given from a machine that is outside the body is called external radiation therapy. Radiation therapy is often used as adjuvant therapy following surgery to reduce the chance of cancer recurrence. Radiation may be used to kill cancer cells in cases in which the tumor was only partially removed. It may be used before surgery to shrink a large tumor. Radiation therapy is not very effective when used alone, although it may be used alone when the patient is too sick to withstand surgery. The skin in the treated area may become red and dry and may take as long as a year to return to normal. Radiation to the chest may damage the lung, causing shortness of breath and other breathing problems. Also, the tube that goes between the mouth and stomach (esophagus) may be irritated by radiation, causing swallowing difficulties. Fatigue, upset stomach, diarrhea, and nausea are also common complaints of patients having radiation therapy. Most side effects go away about two to three weeks after radiation therapy has ended. Chemotherapy Chemotherapy uses anticancer drugs to kill the cancer cells. The drugs are given by mouth (orally) or intravenously. They enter the bloodstream and can travel to all parts of the body. Chemotherapy may be given before surgery to shrink a tumor, which is called neoadjuvant therapy. Thymoma cells are very sensitive to anticancer drugs, especially cisplatin, doxorubicin, and ifosfamide. Generally, a combination of drugs is given because it is more effective than a single drug in GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

treating cancer. Corticosteroids are also used to treat thymoma. The side effects of chemotherapy are significant; and include stomach upset, vomiting, appetite loss, hair loss (alopecia), mouth sores, and fatigue. Women may experience vaginal sores, menstrual cycle changes, and premature menopause. There is also an increased chance of infections.

Alternative treatment Although alternative and complementary therapies are used by many cancer patients, very few controlled studies on the effectiveness of such therapies exist. Mind-body techniques such as prayer, biofeedback, visualization, meditation, and yoga, have not shown any effect in reducing cancer; but they can reduce stress and lessen some of the side effects of cancer treatments. Gerson, macrobiotic, orthomolecular, and Cancell therapies are ineffective treatments for cancer. Clinical studies of hydrazine sulfate found that it had no effect on cancer and even worsened the health and well-being of the study subjects. One clinical study of the drug amygdalin (Laetrile) found that it had no effect on cancer. Laetrile can be toxic and has caused deaths. Shark cartilage has been studied as a cancer treatment and is presently being studied by the FDA in clinical studies. Although the results are mixed, clinical studies suggest that melatonin may increase the survival time and quality of life for cancer patients. Selenium, in safe doses, may delay the progression of cancer. Laboratory and animal studies suggest that curcumin, the active ingredient of turmeric, has anticancer activity. Maitake mushrooms may boost the immune system, according to laboratory and animal studies. The results of laboratory studies suggest that mistletoe has anticancer properties; however, clinical studies have not been conducted in the United States yet.

Prognosis The five-year survival rates for thymomas are 96% for stage I, 86% for stage II, 69% for stage III, and 50% for stage IV. Thorough (radical) surgery is associated with a longer survival rate. Almost 15% of thymoma patients develop a second cancer. Thymomas rarely spread (metastasize) outside of the chest cavity. Metastasis is usually limited to the pleura. Invasive thymomas are prone to recurrence, even 10 to 15 years following surgery. The recurrence rates are drastically reduced and the five-year survival rates are drastically increased in patients who receive adjuvant radiation therapy. 3303

Thymoma

apy may be used along with surgery to treat thymoma. Stages II, III, and IV thymomas are often treated with surgery and some form of adjuvant therapy.

Thyroid biopsy

KEY TERMS Adjuvant therapy—A treatment that is intended to aid the primary treatment. Adjuvant treatments for thymic cancer are radiation therapy and chemotherapy.

National Institutes of Health. National Cancer Institute. 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20982. Cancer Information Service: (800) 4-CANCER. .

Belinda Rowland, Ph.D.

Thymus tumor see Thymoma

Invasive—A descriptive term for thymoma that has spread beyond the outer wall of the thymus. Lymphocyte—A type of white blood cell that is found in the thymus. Neoadjuvant therapy—Radiation therapy or chemotherapy used to shrink a tumor before surgical removal of the tumor. Paraneoplastic syndrome—A set of symptoms that is associated with cancer but is not directly caused by the cancer. Pleura—The outer covering of the lungs.

Thyroid biopsy Definition The thyroid biopsy is a procedure in which a sample of thyroid tissue is withdrawn for laboratory examination. The sample can be withdrawn through a needle or a surgical incision may be made to obtain a piece of thyroid tissue.

Purpose Prevention Because there are no known risk factors for the development of thymoma, there are no preventive measures. However, there may be an association between thymic cancer and exposure of the chest to radiation. Resources BOOKS

American Cancer Society‘s Guide to Complementary and Alternative Cancer Methods, ed. Bruss, Katherine, Salter, Christina, and Esmeralda Galan. Atlanta: American Cancer Society, 2000. Cameron, Robert, Loehrer, Patrick, and Charles Thomas. “Neoplasms of the Mediastinum.” In Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology, ed. DeVita, Vincent, Hellman, Samuel, and Steven Rosenberg. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001, pp.1019- 36. PERIODICALS

Giaccone, Giuseppe. “Treatment of Thymoma and Thymic Carcinoma.” Annals of Oncology 11, Sup. 3 (2000): 245-6. Muller-Hermelink, H. and A. Marx. “Thymoma.” Current Opinion in Oncology 12 (September 2000): 426-33. Thomas, Charles, Wright, Cameron, and Patrick Loehrer. “Thymoma: State of the Art.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 17 (July 1999): 2280-89. ORGANIZATIONS

American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30329. (800) ACS-2345. . Cancer Research Institute, National Headquarters. 681 Fifth Ave., New York, NY 10022. (800) 992-2623. . 3304

The test is generally performed when a lump or a nodule is detected in the thyroid. The test may also be ordered if the thyroid gland is enlarged and the cause is not apparent. The biopsy is usually a test for thyroid cancer.

Precautions A patient with a bleeding disorder should not have a biopsy unless the bleeding problem can be corrected by a transfusion of the cells that cause blood to clot (platelets).

Description The thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland located at the base of the neck. It produces thyroxine, a hormone that plays a very crucial role in regulating the metabolism of the body and controlling several vital functions, such as the heart beat, blood pressure, and body temperature. The thyroid also regulates childhood growth and development. A thyroid biopsy is usually ordered when a painless lump or a nodule is detected, either by the patient or by a doctor during a routine physical examination. A biopsy is the only test that can accurately determine whether the lump is non-cancerous (benign) or cancerous (malignant). The biopsy can be performed in several ways. The “fine needle aspiration” (FNA) can be done in the doctor’s office. An anesthetic is not usually given. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

For “large needle biopsy,” a mild sedative may be given an hour before the procedure, to relax the patient. The patient will be asked to lie on his or her back, with the head tipped back and the neck extended. The biopsy site will be thoroughly cleansed and the physician will inject a local anesthetic. A small incision (about 1 inch) will be made in the skin. The biopsy needle will be inserted through the incision into the thyroid. A sample of tissue will be removed and the needle withdrawn. Pressure is applied at the biopsy site to stem the bleeding and a bandage applied. This test takes five to ten minutes. The “open incisional biopsy” is done in an operating room by a surgeon. The patient will be given a general anesthetic. A sedative will be given an hour before the procedure to relax the patient. An intravenous line will be placed in the arm for infusion of fluids or drugs. An endotracheal tube will be inserted through the mouth into the lungs for administering anesthetic gases. After the patient is anesthetized, a small incision is made in the neck. Either the whole thyroid or a part of it is removed. If only a portion is being removed, the surgeon may send a small piece of remaining tissue to the laboratory for immediate testing while the patient is still on the operating table. If the pathologist’s report comes back stating that cancer is present in the remaining tissue, the entire thyroid is removed. The incision is closed with stitches. The whole procedure may take about an hour.

Aftercare The needle used in fine needle aspiration is so thin, the whole procedure feels like a quick injection. There is no pain or tenderness at the site after the test. In large needle biopsy, a stinging needle prick may be felt when the local anesthetic is injected. The site may be sore for a few hours and tender for a day or two after the test. In the open incisional biopsy, the patient will feel nothing during the procedure, because of the effects of the anesthetic and the sedative. However, the anesthetic may cause the patient to feel drowsy for several hours after the procedure. The anesthetic may also cause the patient to experience some fatigue, and general aches and pains for a day or two after the procedure. The endotracheal tube may make the throat feel mildly sore. If there is swelling at the biopsy site or if the patient develops a fever, the doctor should be notified immediately.

Risks No risks are associated with fine needle aspiration. Large needle biopsy may cause bleeding into the thyroid gland. There is a small risk that the anesthetic used in open surgical biopsy may cause a life-threatening reaction.

Normal results The normal appearance and architecture of the thyroid cells indicate that no cancer cells are present in the thyroid tissue.

Abnormal results Any abnormalities of the thyroid tissue cells may indicate cancer, benign tumors, or some other thyroid disease. If cancer is suspected, the pathologist may do some more testing to identify the extent of the cancer so that it can be treated appropriately. Resources

Preparation The doctor should be informed of any allergies to medications and every medication the patient is taking. If the patient is pregnant, the doctor should be told. The patient will be asked to sign the necessary consent forms. If a needle biopsy is done, no special preparation is needed. If a large needle biopsy is being done, the doctor may order some tests to determine the clotting ability of the blood. If an open incisional biopsy is being done, a general anesthetic is required and the patient will be asked to refrain from eating or drinking anything 8-12 hours before the test. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

BOOKS

The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests. Ed. Barry L. Zaret, et al. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1997. Sobel, David S., and Tom Ferguson. The People’s Book of Medical Tests. New York: Summit Books, 1985. ORGANIZATIONS

American Thyroid Association, Inc. Montefiore Medical Center, 111 East 210th St., Bronx, NY 10467. . Thyroid Foundation of America, Inc. Ruth Sleeper Hall, RSL 350, 40 Parkman St., Boston, MA 02114-2698. (800) 8328321.

Lata Cherath, PhD 3305

Thyroid biopsy

The patient will be asked to lie on his or her back. A pillow will be placed under the shoulders and the neck will be extended. The biopsy site will be cleansed with a sterile antiseptic solution. A thin needle will be inserted into the thyroid, and a sample of thyroid cells and some fluid will be collected. The needle will be quickly withdrawn. Pressure will be applied at the biopsy site to stop the bleeding and a bandage may be used to cover the area. The test takes three to five minutes.

Thyroid cancer

Causes and symptoms

KEY TERMS Biopsy—The surgical removal and microscopic examination of living tissue for diagnostic purposes. Endotracheal tube—A hollow tube that is inserted into the windpipe (trachea), leading to the lungs. Pathologist—A doctor who specializes in the diagnosis of disease by studying cells and tissues under a microscope.

Thyroid cancer Definition Thyroid cancer is a disease in which the cells of the thyroid gland become abnormal, grow uncontrollably, and form a mass of cells called a tumor.

Description Thyroid cancer is grouped into four types based on how its cells appear under a microscope. The types are papillary, follicular, medullary and anaplastic thyroid cancers. They grow at different rates and can spread to other parts of the body if left untreated. The thyroid is a hormone-producing butterfly-shaped gland located in the neck at the base of the throat. It has two lobes, the left and the right. The thyroid uses iodine, a mineral found in some foods, to make several of its hormones. Thyroid hormones regulate essential body processes such as heart rate, blood pressure, body temperature, metabolism; and affect the nervous system, muscles and other organs. These hormones also play an important role in regulating childhood growth and development. Diseases of the thyroid gland affect millions of Americans. The most common diseases of the thyroid are either hyperthyroidism (Graves’ disease) or hypothyroidism, an overactive or an underactive gland, respectively. Sometimes lumps or masses may develop in the thyroid, and although most (ninety-five percent) of these lumps or nodules are noncancerous (benign), all thyroid lumps should be taken seriously. The American Cancer Society estimates that the approximately 17,200 new cases of thyroid cancer that occur in the United States account for 1% of all cancers. Women are three times more likely to develop thyroid cancer than men. Although the disease affects teenagers and young adults, most people that develop thyroid cancer are over 50 years of age. 3306

The exact cause of thyroid cancer is not known; but it is more common in whites than in African Americans. Radiation was used in the 1950s and 1960s to treat acne and to reduce swelling in infections of the tonsils, adenoids and lymph nodes. It has been proven that this exposure is a risk factor for thyroid cancer. In some areas of the world, diets are low in iodine. Papillary and follicular cancers occur more frequently in these areas. Iodine deficiency is not a large problem in the United States because iodine is added to table salt and other foods. Approximately 7% of thyroid cancers are caused by the alteration (mutation) of a gene called the RET gene, which can be inherited. Symptoms are rare so the lump is not usually painful. The symptoms of thyroid nodules are: • a lump or nodule that can be felt in the neck is the most frequent sign of thyroid cancer • the lymph nodes may be swollen and the voice may become hoarse because the tumor presses on the nerves leading to the voice box • some patients experience a tight or full feeling in the neck and have difficulty breathing or swallowing

Diagnosis Physicians use several tests to confirm the suspicion of thyroid cancer, to identify the size and location of the lump and to determine whether the lump is noncancerous (benign) or cancerous (malignant). Blood tests such as the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) test check thyroid function. These are drawn by a technician with a needle and take a few minutes. It takes several days to be interpreted by a pathologist. Calcitonin is produced by the C cells (parafollicular cells) of the thyroid gland when the parafollicular cells of the thyroid become cancerous. Blood calcitonin levels are used to confirm the diagnosis of medullary thyroid cancer if it is suspected. Computed tomography scan (CT scan) or an ultrasonography (ultrasound scan) are imaging tests used to produce a picture of the thyroid and usually last less than one hour. A radiologist usually interprets the results within 24 hours. In ultrasonography, high-frequency sound waves are bounced off the thyroid. The pattern of echoes that is produced by these waves is converted into a computerized image on a television screen. This test can determine whether the lumps found in the thyroid are benign fluid-filled cysts or solid malignant tumors. A radioactive scan may take several hours and can be used to identify any abnormal areas in the thyroid GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The most accurate diagnostic tool for thyroid cancer is a biopsy. In this process a sample of thyroid tissue is withdrawn and examined under a microscope by a pathologist. This usually takes a day or so. The tissue samples can be obtained either by drawing out a sample of tissue through a needle (needle biopsy) or by surgical removal of the nodule (surgical biopsy). A needle biopsy takes a few minutes and can be done by any trained physician, usually a radiologist. The surgical biopsy is done by a surgeon under general anesthesia with the help of an anesthesiologist and will take a few hours. If thyroid cancer is diagnosed, further tests may be done to learn about the stage of the disease and help doctors plan appropriate treatment.

Treatment The aggressiveness of each type of thyroid cancer is different. Cancer staging considers the size of the tumor, whether it has grown into surrounding lymph nodes and whether it has spread to distant parts of the body (metastasized). Age and general health status are also taken into account. In patients less than 45 years old there are only two stages. I papillary or follicular type thyroid cancer, stage I refers to patients without evidence of cancer that has spread to the body. Stage II refers to patients with spread of cancer outside the thyroid gland. In patients over 45, patients with tumors smaller than one cm are classified as stage I, those with tumors not broken through the capsule (covering) of the thyroid belong to stage II, those with tumors outside the capsule or lymph node involvement are called stage III and those with spread outside the thyroid area are stage IV. In medullary-type thyroid cancer, stage I and IV are the same. Stage II consists of patients with tumors greater than one cm and stage III comprises patients with lymph node involvement. The papillary type (60–80% of all thyroid cancers) is a slow-growing cancer that develops in the hormoneGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Thyroid cancer

by giving the patient a very small amount of radioactive iodine, which can either be swallowed or injected into the thyroid. Since the thyroid is the only gland in the body that absorbs iodine, the radioactive iodine accumulates there. An x-ray image can then be taken or an instrument called a “scanner” can be used to identify areas in the thyroid that do not absorb iodine normally. These abnormal spots are called “cold spots” and further tests are performed to check whether the cold spots are benign or malignant tumors. If a significant amount of radioactive iodine is concentrated in the nodule, then it is termed “hot” and is usually benign. Again a radiologist interprets the results within a day.

A gamma scan of the human thyroid gland revealing cancer. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

producing cells (that contain iodine) and can be treated successfully. The follicular type (30–50% of thyroid cancers) also develops in the hormone-producing cells, has a good cure rate but may be difficult to control if the cancer invades blood vessels or grows into nearby structures in the neck. The medullary type (5–7% of all thyroid cancers) develops in the parafollicular cells (also known as the C cells) that produce calcitonin, a hormone that does not contain iodine. Medullary thyroid cancers are more difficult to control because they often spread to other parts of the body. The fourth type of thyroid cancer, anaplastic (2% of all thyroid cancers), is the fastest growing and is usually fatal because the cancer cells rapidly spread to the different parts of the body. More than 90% of patients who are treated for papillary or follicular cancer will live for 15 years or longer after the diagnosis of thyroid cancer. Eighty percent of patients with medullary thyroid cancer will live for at least 10 years after surgery. Only 3–17% of patients with anaplastic cancer survive for five years. Like most cancers, cancer of the thyroid is best treated when it is found early by a primary physician. Treatment depends on the type of cancer and its stage. Four types of treatment are used: surgical removal, radiation therapy, hormone therapy and chemotherapy. Surgical removal is the usual treatment if the cancer has not spread to distant parts of the body. The surgeon may remove the side or lobe of the thyroid where the cancer is found (lobectomy) or all of it (total thyroidectomy). If the adjoining lymph nodes are affected, they may also be removed during surgery. When the thyroid gland is removed and levels of thyroid hormones decrease, the pituitary gland starts to produce TSH that stimulates the thyroid cells to grow. 3307

Thyroid cancer

A radiation-oncologist uses radiation therapy with high-energy x-rays to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. The radiation may come from a machine outside the body (external beam radiation), or the patient may be asked to swallow a drink containing radioactive iodine. Because the thyroid cells take up iodine, the radioactive iodine collects in any thyroid tissue remaining in the body and kills the cancer cells. A hematologist-oncologist uses chemotherapy either as a pill or an injection through a vein in the arm. Alternative treatment Hormone therapy uses hormones after surgery to stop this growth and the formation of new cancerous thyroid cells. To prevent cancerous growth, the natural hormones that are produced by the thyroid are taken in the form of pills. Thus, their levels remain normal and inhibit the pituitary gland from making TSH. If the cancer has spread to other parts of the body and surgery is not possible, hormone treatment is aimed at killing or slowing the growth of cancer cells throughout the body. A powerful phytochemical, lycopene, gives tomatoes their red color and appears to act as an antioxidant in the body, repairing damaged cells and scavenging free radicals, the molecules responsible for most types of degenerative diseases and aging. Antioxidants such as lycopene help inhibit DNA oxidation, which can lead to certain forms of cancer. Lycopene is a normal constituent of human blood and tissues, where it is found in greater concentrations than beta-carotene or any other carotenoid. Tomatoes, including cooked or processed tomatoes, tomato juices, soups, sauces, paste and ketchup, contain more lycopene than any other food. Guava, rose hip, watermelon and grapefruit also contain lycopene. Other antioxidants are: vitamin E (Dosage: 400 IU daily), vitamin C (Dosage: 1,000 to 4,000 mg daily), beta carotene (Dosage: 15 mg (25,000 IU) daily), lutein (Dosage: 6 to 20 mg daily), pycnogenol (Dosage: 25 to 50 mg daily), green tea (Dosage: 300 to 400 mg of green tea polyphenols daily), grape-seed extract (Dosage: 100 mg daily), alpha lipoic acid (Dosage: 50 to 200 mg daily), N-acetylcysteine (Dosage: 600 mg daily) and selenium (Dosage: 200 to 400 mcg daily). Pregnant women should consult a physician before taking any medication.

KEY TERMS Biopsy—The surgical removal and microscopic examination of living tissue for diagnostic purposes. Calcitonin—A hormone produced by the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid. The main function of the hormone is to regulate calcium levels in body serum. Chemotherapy—Treatment of cancer with synthetic drugs that destroy the tumor either by inhibiting the growth of the cancerous cells or by killing them. Hormone therapy—Treatment of cancer by inhibiting the production of such hormones as testosterone and estrogen. Hyperthyroidism—A condition in which the thyroid is overactive due to overstimulation of the thyroid cells. Hypothyroidism—A condition in which the thyroid gland is underactive. Lobectomy—A surgical procedure that removes one lobe of the thyroid. Radiation therapy—Treatment with high-energy radiation from x-ray machines, cobalt, radium, or other sources. Total thyroidectomy—A surgical procedure that removes the entire thyroid gland.

avoided. If a family member has had this disease, the rest of the family can be tested and treated early. The National Cancer Institute recommends that a doctor examine anyone who has received radiation to the head and neck during childhood at intervals of one or two years. The neck and the thyroid should be carefully examined for any lumps or enlargement of the nearby lymph nodes. Ultrasound may also be used to screen for the disease in people at risk for thyroid cancer.

Resources BOOKS

Prevention Because most people with thyroid cancer have no known risk factor, it is not possible to completely prevent this disease. However, inherited cases of medullary thyroid cancer can be prevented if radiation to the neck is 3308

Current Surgical Therapy. 6th ed. Ed. John L. Cameron. Harcourt Brace, 1998. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 13th ed. Ed. Eugene Braunwald, et al. McGraw-Hill, 1995. Schwartz Principles of Surgery. 6th ed. Ed. Seymour Schwartz, et al. McGraw-Hill, 1998. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

National Cancer Institute—Cancernet. .

Kulbir Rangi, DO

Thyroid drugs see Thyroid hormones

Thyroid function tests Definition Thyroid function tests are blood tests used to evaluate how effectively the thyroid gland is working. These tests include the thyroid-stimulating hormone test (TSH), the thyroxine test (T4), the triiodothyronine test (T3), the thyroxine-binding globulin test (TBG), the triiodothyronine resin uptake test (T3RU), and the long-acting thyroid stimulator test (LATS).

Purpose Thyroid function tests are used to: • help diagnose an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) and an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism) • evaluate thyroid gland activity • monitor response to thyroid therapy

Precautions Thyroid treatment must be stopped one month before blood is drawn for a thyroxine (T4) test. Steroids, propranolol (Inderal), cholestyramine (Questran), and other medications that may influence thyroid activity are usually stopped before a triiodothyronine (T3) test. Estrogens, anabolic steroids, phenytoin, and thyroid medications may be discontinued prior to a thyroxinebinding globulin (TBG) test. The laboratory analyzing the blood sample must be told if the patient cannot stop taking any of these medications. Some patients will be told to take these medications as usual so that the doctor can determine how they affect thyroxine-binding globulin. Patients are asked not to take estrogens, androgens, phenytoin (Dilantin), salicylates, and thyroid medications before having a triiodothyronine resin uptake (T3RU) test. Prior to taking a long-acting thyroid stimulant (LATS) test, the patient will probably be told to stop taking all drugs that could affect test results. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Most doctors consider the sensitive thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) test to be the most accurate measure of thyroid activity. By measuring the level of TSH, doctors can determine even small problems in thyroid activity. Because this test is sensitive, abnormalities in thyroid function can be determined before a patient complains of symptoms. TSH “tells” the thyroid gland to secrete the hormones thyroxine (T4) and triiodothyronine (T3). Before TSH tests were used, standard blood tests measured levels of T4 and T3 to determine if the thyroid gland was working properly. The triiodothyrine (T3) test measures the amount of this hormone in the blood. T3 is normally present in very small amounts, but has a significant impact on metabolism. It is the active component of thyroid hormone. The thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) test measures blood levels of this substance, which is manufactured in the liver. TBG binds to T3 and T4, prevents the kidneys from flushing the hormones from the blood, and releases them when and where they are needed to regulate body functions. The triiodothyronine resin uptake (T3RU) test measures blood T4 levels. Laboratory analysis of this test takes several days, and it is used less often than tests whose results are available more quickly. The long-acting thyroid stimulator (LATS) test shows whether blood contains long-acting thyroid stimulator. Not normally present in blood, LATS causes the thyroid to produce and secrete abnormally high amounts of hormones. It takes only minutes for a nurse or medical technician to collect the blood needed for these blood tests. A needle is inserted into a vein, usually in the forearm, and a small amount of blood is collected and sent to a laboratory for testing. The patient will usually feel minor discomfort from the “stick” of the needle.

Preparation There is no need to make any changes in diet or activities. The patient may be asked to stop taking certain medications until after the test is performed.

Aftercare Warm compresses can be used to relieve swelling or discomfort at the site of the puncture. With a doctor’s approval, the patient may start taking medications stopped before the test. 3309

Thyroid function tests

Description

ORGANIZATIONS

Thyroid function tests

Normal results Not all laboratories measure or record thyroid hormone levels the same way. Each laboratory will provide a range of values that are considered normal for each test. Some acceptable ranges are listed below. TSH Normal TSH levels for adults are 0.5–5.0 mU/L. T4 Normal T4 levels are:

LATS Long-acting thyroid stimulator is found in the blood of only 5% of healthy people.

Abnormal results T4 Elevated T4 levels can be caused by: • acute thyroiditis • birth control pills • clofibrate (Altromed-S) • contrast x rays using iodine

• 10.1–2.0 ug/dl at birth

• estrogen therapy

• 7.5–16.5 ug/dl at one to four months

• heparin

• 5.5–14.5 ug/dl at four to 12 months

• heroin

• 5.6–12.6 ug/dl at one to six years

• hyperthyroidism

• 4.9–11.7 ug/dl at six to 10 years

• pregnancy

• 4–11 ug/dl at 10 years and older.

• thyrotoxicosis

Levels of free T4 (thyroxine not attached to TBG) are higher in teenagers than in adults.

• toxic thyroid adenoma

Normal T4 levels do not necessarily indicate normal thyroid function. T4 levels can register within normal ranges in a patient who:

Cirrhosis and severe non-thyroid disease can raise T4 levels slightly. Reduced T4 levels can be caused by: • anabolic steroids

• is pregnant

• androgens

• has recently had contrast x rays

• antithyroid drugs

• has nephrosis or cirrhosis

• cretinism • hypothyroidism

T3

• kidney failure

Normal T3 levels are:

• lithium (Lithane, Lithonate)

• 90–170 ng/dl at birth • 115–190 ng/dl at six to 12 years • 110–230 ng/dl in adulthood.

• myxedema • phenytoin • propranolol T3

TBG Normal TBG levels are: • 1.5–3.4 mg/dl or 15–34 mg/L in adults • 2.9–5.4 mg/dl or 29–54 mg/L in children.

Although T3 levels usually rise and fall when T4 levels do, T3 toxicosis causes T3 levels to rise while T4 levels remain normal. T3 toxicosis is a complication of: • Graves’ disease • toxic adenoma

T3RU Between 25% and 35% of T3 should bind to or be absorbed by the resin added to the blood sample. The test indirectly measures the amount of thyroid binding globulin (TBG) and thyroid-binding prealbumin (TBPA) in the blood. 3310

• toxic nodular goiter T3 levels normally rise when a woman is pregnant or using birth-control pills. Elevated T3 levels can also occur in patients who use estrogen or methadone or who have: • certain genetic disorders that do not involve thyroid malfunction GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Acidosis—A condition in which blood and tissues are unusually acidic.

sitivity, and vision/eye problems. The most common type of this disorder is called Graves’ disease.

Acromegaly—A disorder in which growth hormone (a chemical released from the pituitary gland in the brain) causes increased growth in bone and soft tissue. Patients have enlarged hands, feet, noses, and ears, as well as a variety of other disturbances throughout the body.

Hypoproteinemia—Abnormally low levels of protein in the blood.

Acute intermittent porphyria—An inherited disease affecting the liver and bone marrow. The liver overproduces a specific acid and the disease is characterized by attacks of high blood pressure, abdominal colic, psychosis, and nervous system disorders.

Lithium (Lithane, Lithromate)—Medication prescribed to treat manic (excited) phases of bipolar disorder.

Anabolic steroids—Protein-building compounds used to treat certain anemias and cancers, strengthen bones, and stimulate weight gain and growth. Anabolic steroids are sometimes used to illegally enhance athletic performance. Cholestyramine (Questran)—A drug used to bind with bile acids and prevent their reabsorption and to stimulate fat absorption. Cirrhosis—Progressive disease of the liver, associated with failure in liver cell functioning and blood flow in the liver. Tissue and cells are damaged, the liver becomes fibrous, and jaundice can result. Clofibrate (Altromed-S)—Medication used to lower levels of blood cholesterol and triglycerides. Cretinism—Severe hypothyroidism that is present at birth and characterized by severe mental retardation. Graves’ disease—The most common form of hyperthyroidism, characterized by bulging eyes, rapid heart rate, and other symptoms. Heparin—An organic acid that occurs naturally in the body and prevents blood clots. Heparin is also made synthetically and can be given as a treatment when required. Hepatitis—Inflammation of the liver. Hyperthyroidism—Overactive thyroid gland; symptoms include irritability/nervousness, muscle weakness, tremors, irregular menstrual periods, weight loss, sleep problems, thyroid enlargement, heat sen-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Hypothyroidism—Underactive thyroid gland; symptoms include fatigue, difficulty swallowing, mood swings, hoarse voice, sensitivity to cold, forgetfulness, and dry/coarse skin and hair.

Myxedema—Hypothyroidism, characterized by thick, puffy features, an enlarged tongue, and lack of emotion. Nephrosis—Any degenerative disease of the kidney (not to be confused with nephritis, an inflammation of the kidney due to bacteria). Nodular goiter—An enlargement of the thyroid (goiter) caused when groups of cells collect to form nodules. Phenytoin (Dilantin)—Anti-convulsive medication used to treat seizure disorders. Propranolol (Inderal)—Medication commonly prescribed to treat high blood pressure; is a beta-adrenergic blocker and can also be used to treat irregular heartbeat, heart attack, migraine, and tremors. Reserpine (Serpasil)—A drug prescribed for high blood pressure. Salicylates—Aspirin and certain other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Thiazides—A group of drugs used to increase urine output. Thyroid gland—A butterfly-shaped gland in front and to the sides of the upper part of the windpipe; influences body processes like growth, development, reproduction, and metabolism. Thyroiditis—Inflammation of the thyroid gland. Thyrotoxicosis—A condition resulting from high levels of thyroid hormones in the blood. Toxic thyroid adenoma—Self-contained concentrations of thyroid tissue that may produce excessive amounts of thyroid hormone.

3311

Thyroid function tests

KEY TERMS

Thyroid hormones

• hyperthyroidism • thyroiditis • T3 thyrotoxicosis • toxic adenoma. Low T3 levels may be a symptom of: • acute or chronic illness • hypothyroidism • kidney or liver disease • starvation. Decreased T3 levels can also be caused by using: • anabolic steroids • androgens • phenytoin • propranolol • reserpine (Serpasil) • salicylates in high doses TBG TBG levels, normally high during pregnancy, are also high in newborns. Elevated TBG levels can also be symptoms of: • acute hepatitis • acute intermittent porphyria • hypothyroidism • inherited thyroid hormone abnormality TBG levels can also become high by using: • anabolic steroids • birth control pills • anti-thyroid agents

• marked hypoproteinemia • uncompensated acidosis T3RU A high degree of resin uptake and high thyroxine levels indicate hyperthyroidism. A low degree of resin uptake, coupled with low thyroxine levels, is a symptom of hypothyroidism. Thyroxine and triiodothyronine resin uptake that are not both high or low may be a symptom of a thyroxinebinding abnormality. LATS Long-acting thyroid stimulator, not usually found in blood, is present in the blood of 80% of patients with Graves’ disease. It is a symptom of this disease whether or not symptoms of hyperthyroidism are detected. Resources BOOKS

A Manual of Laboratory and Diagnostic Tests. 5th ed. Ed. Francis Fishback. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1996. Pagana, Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1998. Everything You Need to Know About Medical Tests. Ed. Michael Shaw, et al. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1996. ORGANIZATIONS

The American Thyroid Association, Inc. Montefiore Medical Center, 111 E. 210th St., Bronx, NY 10467. . The Thyroid Foundation of America, Inc. Ruth Sleeper Hall, RSL350, 40 Parkman St., Boston, MA 02114-2698. (800) 832-8321. .

Maureen Haggerty

• clofibrate • estrogen therapy • phenytoin

Thyroid gland removal see Thyroidectomy

• salicylates in high doses • thiazides • thyroid medications • warfarin (Coumadin) TBG levels can be raised or lowered by inherited liver disease whose cause is unknown. Low TBG levels can be a symptom of: • acromegaly • acute hepatitis or other acute illness • hyperthyroidism • kidney disease • malnutrition 3312

Thyroid hormones Definition Thyroid hormones are artificially made hormones that make up for a lack of natural hormones produced by the thyroid gland.

Purpose The thyroid gland, a butterfly-shaped structure in the lower part of the neck, normally produces a hormone GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Thyroid hormones also may be used to treat goiter (enlarged thyroid gland) and certain types of thyroid cancer.

Description Thyroid hormones, also called thyroid drugs, are available only with a physician’s prescription. They are sold in tablet form. A commonly used thyroid hormone is levothyroxine (Synthroid, Levoxyl, Levothroid).

Recommended dosage For adults and teenagers, the usual starting dose of levothyroxine tablets is 0.0125 mg (12.5 micrograms) to 0.05 mg (50 micrograms) per day. The physician who prescribes the medicine may gradually increase the dose over time. For children, the dose depends on body weight and must be determined by a physician. Taking thyroid hormones exactly as directed is very important. The physician who prescribes the medicine will figure out exactly how much of the medicine a patient needs. Taking too much or too little can make the thyroid gland overactive or underactive. This medicine should be taken at the same time every day.

Precautions People who take thyroid hormones because their thyroid glands do not produce enough natural hormone may need to take the medicine for the rest of their lives. Seeing a physician regularly while taking this medicine is important. The physician will make sure that the medicine is working and that the dosage is correct. In patients with certain kinds of heart disease, this medicine may cause chest pains and shortness of breath during exercise. People who have this problem should be careful not to exert themselves too much. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Anyone who is taking thyroid hormones should be sure to tell the health care professional in charge before having any surgical or dental procedures or receiving emergency treatment. This medicine is safe to take during pregnancy, but the dosage may need to be changed. Women who are pregnant should check with their physicians to make sure they are taking the proper dosage. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to thyroid hormones in the past should let his or her physician know before taking the drugs again. The physician should also be told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances. Before using thyroid hormones, people with any of these medical problems should make sure their physicians are aware of their conditions: • heart disease • high blood pressure • hardening of the arteries • diabetes • history of overactive thyroid • underactive adrenal gland • underactive pituitary gland

Side effects This medicine usually does not cause side effects if the dosage is right. Certain symptoms may be signs that the dose needs to be changed. Check with a physician if any of these symptoms occur: • headache • fever • diarrhea • vomiting • changes in appetite • weight loss • changes in menstrual period • tremors of the hands • leg cramps • increased sensitivity to heat • sweating • irritability • nervousness • sleep problems 3313

Thyroid hormones

called thyroxine. This hormone controls the rate of metabolism—all the physical and chemical processes that occur in cells to allow growth and maintain body functions. When the thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroxine, body processes slow down. People with underactive thyroid glands feel unusually tired and may gain weight even though they eat less. They may also have trouble staying warm and may have other symptoms, such as dry skin, dry hair, and a puffy face. By making up for the lack of natural thyroxine and bringing the rate of metabolism back to normal, artificially made thyroid hormone improves these symptoms.

Thyroid nuclear medicine scan

KEY TERMS Adrenal glands—A pair of glands located next to the kidneys. The adrenal glands produce hormones that control many body functions. Hormone—A chemical that is produced in one part of the body and then travels through the bloodstream to another part of the body where it has its effect. Pituitary gland—A pea-sized gland at the base of the brain that produces many hormones that affect growth and body functions.

Other side effects are possible. Anyone who has unusual symptoms while taking thyroid hormones should get in touch with his or her physician.

Interactions

Purpose A thyroid scan may be ordered by a physician when the gland becomes abnormally large, especially if the enlargement is greater on one side, or when hard lumps (nodules) are felt. The scan can be helpful in determining whether the enlargement is caused by a diffuse increase in the total amount of thyroid tissue or by a nodule or nodules. When other laboratory studies show an overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism) or an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism), a radioactive iodine uptake scan is often used to confirm the diagnosis. It is frequently done along with a thyroid scan.

Precautions

Thyroid hormones may interact with other medicines. This may increase or decrease the effects of the thyroid medicine and may interfere with treatment. Anyone who takes thyroid hormones should not take any other prescription or nonprescription (over-the-counter) medicines without the approval of his or her physician. Among the drugs that may interact with thyroid hormones are: • Medicine for colds, hay fever, and other allergies • Medicine for asthma and other breathing problems • Medicine for diabetes • Blood thinners • Amphetamines • Diet pills (appetite suppressants) • Cholesterol-lowering drugs such as cholestyramine (Questran) and colestipol (Colestid)

Women who are pregnant should not have this test.

Description This test is performed in a radiology facility, either in an outpatient x ray center or a hospital department. Most often, the patient is given the radioactive substance in the form of a tasteless liquid or capsule. It may be injected into a vein (intravenously) in some instances. Images will be taken at a specified amount of time after this, depending on the radioisotope used. Most often, scanning is done 24 hours later, if the radioisotope is given orally. If it is given intravenously, the scan is performed approximately 20 minutes later. For a thyroid scan, the patient is positioned lying down on his or her back, with the head tilted back. The radionuclide scanner, also called a gamma camera, is positioned above the thyroid area as it scans. This takes 30-60 minutes.

Nancy Ross-Flanigan

The uptake study may be done with the patient sitting upright in a chair or lying down. The procedure is otherwise the same as described for the thyroid scan. It takes approximately 15 minutes. There is no discomfort involved with either study.

Thyroid nuclear medicine scan

A thyroid scan may also be referred to as a thyroid scintiscan. The name of the radioactive substance used may be incorporated and the study called a technetium thyroid scan or an iodine thyroid scan. The radioactive iodine uptake scan may be called by its initials, an RAIU test, or an iodine uptake test.

Definition A thyroid nuclear medicine scan is a diagnostic procedure to evaluate the thyroid gland, which is located in the front of the neck and controls the body’s metabolism. 3314

A radioactive substance that concentrates in the thyroid is taken orally or injected into a vein (intravenously), or both. A special camera is used to take an image of the distribution of the radioactive substance in and around the thyroid gland. This is interpreted to evaluate thyroid function and to diagnose abnormalities.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Certain medications can interfere with iodine uptake. These include certain cough medicines, some oral contraceptives, and thyroid medications. The patient is usually instructed to stop taking these medicines for a period of time before the test. This period may range from several days up to three to four weeks, depending on the amount of time the medicine takes to clear from the body. Other nuclear medicine scans and x ray studies using contrast material performed within the past 60 days may affect this test. Therefore, patients should tell their doctors if they have had either of these types of studies before the thyroid scan is begun, to avoid inaccurate results. Some institutions prefer that the patient have nothing to eat or drink after midnight on the day before the radioactive liquid or capsule is to be taken. A normal diet can usually be resumed two hours after the radioisotope is taken. Dentures, jewelry, and other metallic objects must be removed before the scanning is performed. No other physical preparation is needed. The patient should understand that there is no danger of radiation exposure to themselves or others. Only very small amounts of radioisotope are used. The total amount of radiation absorbed is often less than the dose received from ordinary x rays. The scanner or camera does not emit any radiation, but detects and records it from the patient.

KEY TERMS Radioisotope—A radioactive or radiation-emitting form of an element. Radionuclide—A substance that emits radiation as it disintegrates.

An area of decreased radionuclide uptake may be called a cold nodule or “cold spot.” This indicates that this area of the thyroid gland is underactive. A variety of conditions, including cysts, nonfunctioning benign growths, localized inflammation, or cancer may produce a cold spot. A thyroid nuclear medicine scan is rarely sufficient to establish a clear diagnosis. Frequently, the information revealed will need to be combined with data from other studies to determine the problem. Resources BOOKS

Goldsmith, Stanley J. “Endocrine System.” In Nuclear Medicine, ed. Donald R. Bernier, et al. St. Louis: Mosby, 1997. PERIODICALS

Rifat, Sami T., and Mack T. Ruffin. “Management of Thyroid Nodules.” American Family Physician 50 (15 Sept. 1994): 785-791.

Aftercare No isolation or special precautions are needed after a thyroid scan. The patient should check with his or her physician about restarting any medications that were stopped before the scan.

Risks There are no risks with this procedure.

Normal results A normal scan will show a thyroid of normal size, shape, and position. The amount of radionuclide uptake by the thyroid will be normal according to established laboratory figures. There will be no areas where radionuclide uptake is increased or decreased.

Ellen S. Weber, MSN

Thyroid sonogram see Thyroid ultrasound

Thyroid ultrasound Definition Thyroid ultrasound is an imaging technique used for diagnosing suspected thyroid disease. It uses harmless, high-frequency sound waves to form an image. The sound waves are reflected by thyroid tissue to form a picture of internal structures. It is not invasive and involves no radiation.

Purpose Abnormal results An area of increased radionuclide uptake may be called a hot nodule or “hot spot.” This means that a benign growth is overactive. Despite the name, hot nodules are unlikely to be caused by cancer. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The thyroid gland is an organ located in front of the neck. It plays an important role in controlling the body’s metabolism. Most thyroid ultrasounds are performed to evaluate a small lump (nodule) in the thyroid found during a physical examination or found by a radionuclide 3315

Thyroid ultrasound

Preparation

Thyroidectomy

study (thyroid scan). The ultrasound can establish if the nodule is a cyst, which is an abnormal lump that contains fluid, or a solid mass. Cysts are almost always noncancerous (benign), although in some cases the fluid may be taken out for additional testing. If there are several masses or nodules, this indicates the presence of enlargement of the thyroid gland (goiter). If there is only one mass, it may be cancerous and needs further evaluation. Specialized thyroid ultrasounds, such as color Doppler flow studies, can add valuable information. By showing an image of the blood circulation in the gland, this study can assess some ambiguous masses in greater detail, to further refine diagnosis. In some cases, a needle will be inserted to remove some tissue from the mass for evaluation in a laboratory (needle biopsy). Ultrasound is used during this procedure to help the physician guide the needle to the mass that needs to be evaluated.

shaver, against the skin. It is moved over the thyroid area. The images from reflected sound waves appear on a monitor screen. There is no discomfort involved with this study. The examination takes 15–30 minutes.

Preparation Some facilities recommend limiting food and drink for one hour before the study to prevent discomfort. No other preparation is needed.

Aftercare No special restrictions or procedures are needed after a thyroid ultrasound.

Risks There are no risks with this procedure.

Thyroid ultrasound can measure the size of the thyroid with great precision. Ultrasound studies may be done periodically to assess the response of the thyroid gland to medical therapy. An enlarged gland or a benign nodule should decrease in size when appropriate thyroid medication is taken.

A normal study would reveal a thyroid gland of normal size, shape, position, and uniform texture.

Patients who have received therapeutic radiation to the head or neck may be monitored at regular intervals using thyroid ultrasound. The radiation puts these patients at higher risk for developing thyroid cancer or other abnormalities. In the early stages, these conditions may not cause symptoms or be apparent during a physical examination. They can, however, be detected by ultrasound.

A thyroid ultrasound may reveal cysts, solid masses that may or may not be cancerous, or an enlarged thyroid gland (goiter). In many cases, the ultrasound can establish a diagnosis. Sometimes the information revealed will need to be combined with data from other studies to determine the problem.

Certain invasive medical procedures may be performed under ultrasound guidance. This is because ultrasound allows the physician to observe a needle as it enters body tissue below the skin. This is useful to direct the removal of fluid from a cyst (aspiration) or needle biopsy. Medications to treat recurrent cysts may be administered directly to the area using ultrasound guidance.

Precautions Thyroid ultrasound is safe for people of all ages. It is the preferred procedure to evaluate suspected disease in pregnant women because no radiation is involved.

Normal results

Abnormal results

Resources PERIODICALS

Rifat, Sami F., and Mack T. Ruffin. “Management of Thyroid Nodules.” American Family Physician 50 (15 Sept. 1994): 785-791.

Ellen S. Weber, MSN

Thyroid storm see Hyperthyroidism Thyroid x ray see Thyroid nuclear medicine scan

Description The study may be done in an outpatient facility or in a hospital department. The patient lies on his or her back. A pillow or rolled towel is placed under the shoulders and upper back, allowing the head to tilt back (hyperextend). A gel that enhances sound transmission is spread over the thyroid area. The technologist then gently places a transducer, an instrument about the size of an electric 3316

Thyroidectomy Definition Thyroidectomy is a surgical procedure in which all or part of the thyroid gland is removed. The thyroid gland is located in the forward part of the neck (anterior) just under the skin and in front of the Adam’s apple. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

All or part of the thyroid gland may be removed to correct a variety of abnormalities of the gland. If the patient has a goiter (an enlargement of the thyroid gland, causing a swelling in the front of the neck), it may cause difficulties with swallowing or breathing. Hyperthyroidism (over-functioning of the thyroid gland) produces hypermetabolism (abnormally increased use of oxygen, nutrients, and other materials). If medication cannot adequately treat this condition, or if the patient is a child or pregnant, the thyroid gland must be removed. Both cancerous tumors and noncancerous tumors (frequently called nodules) can occur and they must be removed, in addition to some or all of the thyroid gland.

nature of the thyroid disease. Laboratory analysis of blood determines the levels of active thyroid hormone circulating in the body. Sonograms and computed tomography scans (CT scans) help to determine the size of the thyroid gland and location of abnormalities. A thyroid nuclear medicine scan assesses the function of the gland. A needle biopsy of an abnormality or aspiration (removal by suction) of fluid from the thyroid gland may also be done to help determine the diagnosis. If the diagnosis is hyperthyroidism, the patient may be asked to take antithyroid medication or iodides before the operation; or continued treatment with antithyroid drugs may be the treatment of choice. Otherwise, no other special procedure must be followed prior to the operation.

Precautions There are definite risks associated with the procedure. Therefore, the thyroid gland should be removed only if there is a pressing reason or medical condition that requires it.

Aftercare The incision requires little to no care after the dressing is removed. The area may be bathed gently with a mild soap. The sutures or the metal clips are removed three to seven days after the operation.

Description Thyroidectomy is an operative procedure done most commonly by a general surgeon, or occasionally by an otolaryngologist, in the operating room of a hospital. The operation begins when an anesthesiologist puts the patient to sleep. The anesthesiologist injects drugs into the patient’s veins and then places an airway tube in the windpipe to ventilate (provide air for) the patient. The surgeon makes an incision in the front of the neck where a tight-fitting necklace would rest. He locates and takes care not to injure the parathyroid glands and the recurrent laryngeal nerves, while freeing the thyroid gland from these surrounding structures. The blood supply to the portion of the thyroid gland that is to be removed is clamped off. Then all or part of the gland is removed. If cancer is present, all, or almost all, of the gland is removed. If other diseases or a nodule is present, the surgeon may remove only part of the gland. The total amount of thyroid gland removed depends upon the thyroid disease being treated. A drain (a soft plastic tube that drains fluid out of the area) may be placed before the incision is closed. The incision is closed either with sutures (stitches) or metal clips. A dressing is placed over the incision and the drain, if one is used. Patients generally stay in the hospital one to four days after completion of the operation.

Preparation Before a thyroidectomy is performed, a variety of tests and studies are usually required to determine the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Risks As with all operations, patients who are obese, smoke, or have poor nutrition are at greater risk for developing complications related to the general anesthetic itself. Hoarseness or voice loss may develop if the recurrent laryngeal nerve was injured or destroyed during the operation. This is more apt to occur in patients who have large goiters or cancerous tumors. Hypoparathyroidism (under-functioning of the parathyroid glands) can occur if the parathyroid glands are injured or removed at the time of the thyroidectomy. Hypothyroidism (under-functioning of the thyroid gland) can occur if all or nearly all of the thyroid gland is removed. This may be intentional when the diagnosis is cancer. If the patient’s thyroid levels remain high, he may be required to take thyroid replacement for the rest of his life. The neck and the area surrounding the thyroid gland have a rich supply of blood vessels. Bleeding in the area of the operation may occur and be difficult to control or stop. Rarely is a blood transfusion required, although a hematoma (collection of blood) may develop. If this occurs, it may be life-threatening. As the hematoma enlarges, it may obstruct the airway and cause the patient to stop breathing. If a hematoma does develop in the neck, it may require drainage to clear the airway. Wound infections can occur. If they do, the incision is drained, and there are usually no serious consequences. 3317

Thyroidectomy

Purpose

Thyroiditis

Description

KEY TERMS Endocrinologist—A physician who specializes in treating patients who have diseases of the thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal glands, and/or the pancreas. Hyperthyroidism—Abnormal over-functioning of the thyroid glands. Patients are hypermetabolic, lose weight, are nervous, have muscular weakness and fatigue, sweat more, and have increased urination and bowel movements. This is also called thyrotoxicosis. Hypothyroidism—Abnormal under-functioning of the thyroid gland. Patients are hypometabolic, gain weight, and are sluggish. Recurrent laryngeal nerve—A nerve that lies very near the parathyroid glands and serves the larynx or voice box.

The thyroid is the largest gland in the neck. It produces, secretes, and stores thyroxine (T4), a hormone that influences the metabolism of just about every body process. When the thyroid gland is functioning properly, hormone release is carefully regulated. When bacteria or viruses invade and inflame the gland, T4 surges into the bloodstream and raises hormone levels that then discourage the gland from creating more T4. Eventually the hormone stores are exhausted, the thyroid loses its ability to manufacture T4, and an underactive thyroid (hypothyroidism) results. The major cause of hypothyroidism, thyroiditis affects about 12 million people in the United States. This condition is more common in women than in men and usually develops between ages 30–50. Hashimoto’s disease The most common type of thyroiditis is Hashimoto’s disease, a painless disorder also known as:

Normal results Most patients are discharged from the hospital one to four days after the procedure. Most resume their normal activities two weeks after the operation. Patients who have cancer may require subsequent treatment by an oncologist or a endocrinologist.

• chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis • lymphadenoid goiter • struma lymphomatosa Hashimoto’s disease can develop at any age, but is most common in middle-aged women. This immune system disorder runs in families, and affects about 5% of adults in the United States.

Resources BOOKS

Kaplan, Edwin. “Thyroid and Parathyroid.” In Principles of Surgery, ed. Seymour I. Schwartz, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994. “Thyroidectomy.” In The American Medical Association Encyclopedia of Medicine, ed. Charles B. Claymon. New York: Random House, 1989. OTHER

“Thyroid Gland Removal.” ThriveOnline. .

Mary Jeanne Krob, MD, FACS

Thyroiditis Definition Thyroiditis is inflammation of the thyroid gland, a butterfly-shaped organ next to the windpipe. 3318

• autoimmune thyroiditis

Hashimoto’s disease slowly destroys thyroid tissue and robs the gland of its ability to change iodine into T4. The condition progresses so gradually that many people who have it do not realize anything is wrong until the enlarged gland forms a goiter, a swelling seen and felt in the front of the neck. This may not happen until weeks or even years after an individual develops Hashimoto’s. Subacute thyroiditis Much less common than Hashimoto’s disease, subacute thyroiditis is a painful inflammation that develops suddenly in a patient who has had a viral infection, such as mumps or an upper respiratory illness. Pain radiates throughout the neck and patients feel ill and feverish. It may take as long as several months for normal thyroid function to resume. Subacute thyroiditis is also called: • DeQuervain’s thyroiditis • giant cell thyroiditis GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• influenza

• subacute granulomatous thyroiditis

• mumps

Thyroiditis

• granulomatous thyroiditis

• upper respiratory infections Silent thyroiditis The least common of the three major types, silent thyroiditis is characterized by rigidity and slight enlargement of the thyroid gland. Postpartum thyroiditis, a form of silent thyroiditis, develops in 5–9% of all women who have recently given birth. Postpartum thyroiditis develops within a year of the baby’s birth and disappears within six months. Acute thyroiditis Caused by acute infection, this rare disease is a medical emergency. A patient who has acute thyroiditis has a high fever and feels very ill. The neck is red, hot, and very tender.

Causes and symptoms Hashimoto’s disease Hashimoto’s disease develops when the immune system attacks the thyroid gland. It may be related to such hormone-related (endocrine system) disorders as: • Addison’s disease. This condition, caused by malfunction of the adrenal gland, is characterized by weakness, loss of weight and appetite, and increased sensitivity to cold. • Diabetes mellitus. This metabolic disorder is caused by a lack of insulin production or by the body’s inability to process insulin. • Graves’ disease. This disease is the most common form of hyperthyroidism. • Vitiligo. This is a noncancerous skin disease characterized by unpigmented patches of skin. Being female and having a family history of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis increases the likelihood of developing the disease. Its symptoms include: • constipation • fatigue

• viruses that produce cold symptoms and inflammation of the membrane that protects the brain (meningitis), inflammation of the sac that surrounds the heart (pericarditis), inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis), and other diseases People who have subacute thyroiditis feel feverish, weak, and tired. The thyroid is sore to the touch. They may be nervous, sweat, and have trouble tolerating heat or swallowing. Symptoms of subacute thyroiditis also include: • rapid heartbeat • tremors • weight loss Silent thyroiditis The cause of silent thyroiditis is uncertain, but the condition is believed to be an immune-system disorder triggered by childbirth. Although silent thyroiditis is painless, the condition’s other symptoms are similar to those of subacute thyroiditis. The thyroid gland enlarges only slightly, and the eyes do not bulge.

Diagnosis Family physicians and endocrinologists usually base a diagnosis of thyroiditis on: • blood levels of thyroid hormones, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and anti-thyroid antibodies • personal and family medical history • the appearance of a patient’s thyroid gland Thyroid antibodies present in 95% of patients with Hashimoto’s thyroiditis make it possible to diagnose this disease without surgery or biopsy. A blood test that measures sedimentation rate, an indication of the extent of inflammation, is a useful tool for diagnosing subacute thyroiditis.

• goiter or enlarged neck

Treatment

• inability to tolerate cold temperatures

Medical therapy for thyroiditis includes:

• weight gain, some patients’ faces swell and their joints stiffen. Subacute thyroiditis Characterized by painful gland enlargement that is sometimes mistaken for a sore throat that may last for months, subacute thyroiditis often follows: GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• antibiotics to fight infection • high doses of aspirin to relieve inflammation • hormones to suppress or replace thyroid function • pain medications Cortisone drugs are sometimes prescribed to reduce persistent inflammation. In rare instances, surgery can be 3319

Thyroiditis

used to drain infection or relieve pressure near the thyroid gland. Hashimoto’s disease The goal of treatment for Hashimoto’s disease is to prevent the thyroid gland from getting larger. Regular monitoring may be the only treatment indicated for patients whose gland is only slightly enlarged, and who show no signs of hormone deficiency. Levothyroxine (Synthroid) may be prescribed to correct hormone deficiency in a patient who has a large goiter. Subacute thyroiditis The goal of treatment for subacute thyroiditis is to relieve pain, reduce inflammation, and regulate hyperthyroidism. Bed rest and beta blockers (propranolol, nadolol) may be necessary until thyroid activity is controlled, and the patient may have to take: • anti-inflammatory medication for several weeks • high doses of aspirin • other analgesics If subacute thyroiditis continues for a long time, cortisone and thyroid hormone medication may be prescribed to relieve inflammation and allow the gland to rest. Glucocorticoids (prednisone) are prescribed for symptoms that do not respond to other treatment. The original problem often becomes more pronounced after these medications are discontinued.

may be necessary, regular medical monitoring should continue even after the patient has apparently recovered. Hashimoto’s disease Some cases of Hashimoto’s disease remain stable for years. Others slowly progress to hypothyroidism, which is treated with thyroid hormone replacement therapy. Subacute thyroiditis Most patients with subacute thyroiditis recover fully after no more than a few months. This condition occasionally recurs, but severe or long-term complications are rare. Silent thyroiditis Four of every five patients with silent thyroiditis recover completely within three months. The thyroid status of these patients should be evaluated within 12 months. Because silent thyroiditis recurs in 10% of patients within three years and may progress to hypothyroidism, medical monitoring should continue for three years after recovery appears complete.

Prevention Flu shots or immunizations for measles, mumps, and rubella may help prevent conditions associated with subacute thyroiditis. There is no known way to prevent other forms of thyroiditis.

Silent thyroiditis Most patients who have silent thyroiditis don’t need any treatment, but: • bed rest and beta blockers are occasionally needed to regulate rapid heart beat • inderal (propanolol) may be prescribed for brief periods of hyperthyroidism • steroids may be prescribed for severe episodes of acute inflammation Acute thyroiditis Acute thyroiditis requires emergency treatment with antibiotics and surgery.

Prognosis Thyroiditis usually responds to treatment, and some patients recover normal thyroid function without treatment. Because permanent loss of thyroid function is a possibility and life-long thyroid replacement therapy 3320

Resources ORGANIZATIONS

The Thyroid Foundation of America. 350 Ruth Sleeper Hall, Parkman St., Boston, MA 02114. (800) 232-8321. . The Thyroid Society for Education and Research. 7515 South Main St., Suite 545, Houston, TX 77030. (800) 849-7643. . OTHER

“Chronic Thyroiditis (Hashimoto’s disease).” Health Answers.com 30 Apr. 1998 . “How do Doctors Test for Thyroiditis?” The Thyroid Society Page. 20 Apr. 1998 . “Silent Thyroiditis.” The Merck Page. 22 Apr. 1998 . “Subacute Thyroiditis.” The Merck Page. 22 Apr. 1998 . “Subacute Thyroiditis.” HealthAnswers.com 30 Apr. 1998 . “Thyroiditis.” ThriveOnline. 21 Apr. 1998 . GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Addison’s disease—A disease that results from a deficiency in adrenocortical hormones. Diabetes mellitus—A disorder of the pancreas. This chronic disorder of carbohydrate metabolism results in hyperglycemia and glycosuria. Goiter—An abnormal enlargement of the thryroid gland. Graves’ disease—Also called hyperthyroidism, this disease results from overactivity of the thyroid gland. Subacute—An abnormal condition present in a person who appears to be clinically well. Vitiligo—A benign skin disease that results in irregular patches of skin that are totally lacking in color.

The purpose of the tilt table test is to help determine appropriate therapy for individuals with fainting (syncope) and presyncope of unexplained origin.

Precautions Precautions are few with the tilt table test. However, when any drug is used with this test, the appropriate precautions for that particular drug should be observed. For example, when isoproterenol or similiar drugs are used during the tilt table test, the taking of non-prescription drugs for asthma, cough, cold, or allergy; appetite suppressants; sleeping pills; or drugs containing caffeine should be made known to the physician prior to the test. Likewise, the physician should be informed of any allergies to any sympathomimetic drugs, including several of the diet pills on the market. The physician should be told of any serious heart-rhythm disorders.

Description “What are the Main Types of Thyroiditis?” The Thyroid Society Page. 20 Apr. 1998 . “What is Thyroiditis?” The Thyroid Society Page. 20 Apr. 1998 . “Your Thyroid.” Endocrine Web Page. 22 Apr. 1998 .

Maureen Haggerty

Thyrotoxicosis see Hyperthyroidism Thyroxine-binding globulin test see Thyroid function tests Thyroxine test see Thyroid function tests TIA see Transient ischemic attack Tic douloureux see Trigeminal neuralgia Tick fever see Relapsing fever

Tilt table test Definition The tilt table test is a test in which a patient is positioned in a supine position and brought to a predetermined angle or angles from the horizontal position. Such positioning helps to determine the cause of any decrease in oxygen to the brain. Different types of drugs may also used in the testing process. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Syncope is described as a pathological brief loss of consciousness caused by a temporary deficiency of oxygen in the brain. Previous studies have shown the effectiveness of tilt table testing in establishing the diagnosis of neurocardiogenic syncope, and in dictating therapy in patients with syncope of unknown origin. Despite its usefulness, small numbers of patients and brief followup reports have limited the majority of studies. Sensitivityenhancing techniques, such as the administration of isoproterenol, are applied in specific cases to children and young adults to compensate for the otherwise low sensitivity (20-30%) observed in that population.

Preparation In order for a patient to make informed decisions about any diagnostic test or procedure, there are important questions that need to be asked prior to the procedure. The information gained will be helpful for that patient in determining benefits, risks, and cost of the procedure, and alternatives. The patient should understand the purpose of the tilt table test, and the diagnosis that the physician is trying to confirm or rule out. If the tilt table test is positive, the patient should ask questions about the frequency of false-positive results for that particular tilt table procedure, and should inquire about the next step in treatment.

Aftercare After the procedure, the patient is asked to transfer from the supine position to a sitting position, and is observed for a short period of time. During this time and 3321

Tilt table test

Purpose

Tinnitus

ORGANIZATIONS

KEY TERMS Sympathomimetic—Denoting a drug that mimics the effects of stimulation of organs and structures by the sympathetic nervous system. The sympathetic nervous system pertains to the part of the nervous system originating in the thoracic and lumbar regions of the spinal cord. In general, it inhibits or opposes the physiological effects of another aspect of the nervous system, as in tending to reduce digestive secretions, speed up the heart, and contract the blood vessels. Syncope—A loss of consciousness over a short period of time, caused by a temporary lack of oxygen in the brain. Vertigo—The sensation of dizziness.

American Medical Association. 515 N. State St., Chicago, IL 60612. (312) 464-5000. .

Jeffrey P. Larson, RPT

Tinea pedis see Athlete’s foot Tinea cruris see Ringworm Tingling see Numbness and tingling

Tinnitus Definition Tinnitus is hearing ringing, buzzing, or other sounds without an external cause. Patients may experience tinnitus in one or both ears or in the head.

after several minutes in the sitting position, any symptoms of dizziness and vertigo are noted. When ready, the individual transfers from the sitting position to standing. After additional observation and taking of vital signs, the individual is allowed to go home.

Risks Risks of the tilt table test are low, but do include significant changes in blood pressure while in the supine position, and any adverse reactions to any drugs administered during the tilt table test.

Description Tinnitus affects as many as 40 million adults in the United States. It is defined as either objective or subjective. In objective tinnitus, the doctor can hear the sounds, as well as the patient. Objective tinnitus is typically caused by tumors, turbulent blood flow through malformed vessels, or by rhythmic muscular spasms. Most cases of tinnitus are subjective, which means that only the patient can hear the sounds.

Causes and symptoms Normal results Normal results of the tilt table test should help the physician in assessing what may or may not be the cause of the syncope.

Abnormal results Abnormal results include any pathologic reactions to the position changes or sensitivity enhancing techniques, such as the administration of isoproterenol or other related drugs.

Subjective tinnitus is frequently associated with hearing loss. About 90% of patients have sensorineural hearing loss; 5% suffer from conductive hearing loss; 5% have normal hearing. The causes of subjective tinnitus include: • impacted ear wax • ear infections • hardening of the structures of the inner ear • hearing loss related to age or excessive noise • ototoxic medications, including aspirin, quinine, some diuretics, heavy metals, alcohol, and certain antibiotics

Resources

• meniere’s syndrome

PERIODICALS

• head trauma

Tonnessen, G. E., et. al. “The Value of Tilt Table Testing with Isoproterenol in Determining Therapy in Adults with Syncope and Presyncope of Unexplained Origin.” Archives of Internal Medicine 154, no. 14 (25 July 1994): 1613-7.

• systemic diseases, including syphilis, hypertension, anemia, or hypothyroidism

3322

• tumors of the ear GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Diagnosis of tinnitus includes a physical examination of the patient’s head and neck. The doctor will use an otoscope to examine the ears for wax, infection, or structural changes. He or she will also use a stethoscope to listen to the blood vessels in the neck. Additional tests may include the following: Tuning fork tests The Rinne and Weber tests are commonly used to evaluate the type and severity of hearing loss. In the Weber test, the doctor holds a tuning fork against the patient’s forehead or front teeth. If the hearing loss is sensorineural, the sound radiates to the ear with better hearing; if the hearing loss is conductive, the sound will be louder in the damaged ear. In the Rinne test, the tuning fork is placed alternately on the mastoid bone (behind the ear) and in front of the ear. In conductive hearing loss, bone conduction (BC) is greater than air conduction (AC). In sensorineural hearing loss, AC is greater than BC. Diagnostic imaging Magnetic resonance angiography or venography (MRA and MRV) can be used to evaluate malformations of the blood vessels. Computed tomography scans (CT scans) or magnetic resonance imaging scans (MRIs) can be used to locate tumors or abnormalities of the brain stem.

Tinnitus

Diagnosis

KEY TERMS Conductive hearing loss—Hearing loss caused by loss of function in the external or middle ear. Ménière’s syndrome—A disease of the inner ear, marked by recurrent episodes of loss of balance (vertigo) and roaring in the ears lasting several hours. Its cause is unknown. Ototoxic—Damaging to the nerves controlling the senses of hearing and balance. Sensorineural hearing loss—Hearing loss caused by damage to the nerves or parts of the inner ear governing the sense of hearing.

the elimination of coffee and other stimulants, may be useful, since stimulants can make tinnitus worse. In addition, reducing the amount of fat and cholesterol in the diet can help improve blood circulation to the ears. Nutritional supplementation with vitamin C, vitamin E, B vitamins, calcium, magnesium, potassium, and essential fatty acids is also recommended. Gingko (Gingko biloba) is often suggested, since it is believed to enhance circulation to the brain. Acupuncture treatments may help decrease the level of tinnitus sounds the patient hears, and constitutional homeopathic treatment may also be effective.

Prognosis Blood tests The doctor may order a complete blood count (CBC) with specific antibody tests to rule out syphilis or immune system disorders.

Treatment Some cases of tinnitus can be treated by removal of the underlying cause. These include surgical treatment of impacted ear wax, tumors, head injuries, or malformed blood vessels; discontinuance of ototoxic medications; and antibiotic treatment of infections. Subjective tinnitus, especially that associated with age-related hearing loss, can be treated with hearing aids, noise generators or other masking devices, biofeedback, antidepressant medications, or lifestyle modifications (elimination of smoking, coffee, and aspirin).

Alternative treatment A variety of alternative therapies may be helpful in the treatment of tinnitus. Dietary adjustments, including GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The prognosis depends on the cause of the tinnitus and the patient’s emotional response. Most patients with subjective tinnitus do not find it seriously disturbing, but about 5% have strong negative feelings. These patients are frequently helped by instruction in relaxation techniques. Resources BOOKS

House, John W. “Tinnitus.” In Conn’s Current Therapy, 1996, ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Jackler, Robert K., and Michael J. Kaplan. “Ear, Nose, & Throat.” In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1998. 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. “Otolaryngology: Tinnitus.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. Rowe, Lee D. “Otolaryngology—Head & Neck Surgery.” In Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment. 10th ed. Ed. Lawrence W. Way. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1994.

Rebecca J. Frey, PhD 3323

Tissue typing

Tissue compatibility see Tissue typing Tissue plasminogen activator see Thrombolytic therapy

Tissue typing Definition Tissue typing is a group of procedures that determines the type of histocompatibility antigens on a person’s cells or tissues. This procedure is typically used prior to transplantation of tissues or organs.

Purpose Tissue typing is done prior to transplantation to ensure as close a match as possible between the donor and the recipient. If the histocompatibility antigens do not match well, there is a much greater chance that the recipient will reject the donated tissue. Histocompatibility antigens are molecules on the surface of all cells in the body. The specific types of histocompatibility antigens present on a person’s cells determine their identity and distinguish each person. They are a “fingerprint.” Each person has a unique set of histocompatibility antigens. If the antigens on tissue or organs from a donor do not match that of the recipient, a rejection response can occur. The recipient’s immune system will detect the difference between the two sets of antigen and start a rejection response to kill the donated tissue. Except in the case of identical twins, no two people are identical in terms of their histocompatibility antigen types. However, the closer two tissues come to matching, the more likely the recipient will accept the donated tissue or organ. Human Lymphocyte Antigens (HLA) is the name given to the most commonly used histocompatibility antigens. The antigens can be grouped into two classes: class I antigens are found on almost all cells, and class II antigens are normally found only on B lymphocytes, macrophages, monocytes, dendritic cells, and endothelial cells.

Description Generally, typing is performed on blood cells because they are an easy sample to obtain. Blood is withdrawn from a vein in the forearm, and the cells are separated. There are a number of different techniques used to identify the antigens on the cells. Typically, specific antibodies react with the cells. Each antibody 3324

KEY TERMS Antibody—A molecule produced by the body that is part of the immune response to attack antigens. Antigen—A molecule that causes the body to produce an immunological response to attack the antigen. Cornea—The transparent outer layer of the eye. It covers the iris and lens. Lymphocyte—A class of white blood cells that are responsible for creating the immune response to antigens.

preparation is specific for one histocompatibility antigen. If the antigen is present, the antibody will bind to it. Laboratory instruments are used to detect antibody binding to the cells. Class II antigens are determined by the mixed lymphocyte reaction (MLR) or by a polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In the mixed lymphocyte reaction, lymphocyte replication occurs if there is a mismatch, and is detected by a specific assay. The PCR test is a new DNA-based test that can detect the presence or absence of antigens by determining whether cells have the genes for the antigens. One type of transplant does not require tissue typing. In the case of corneal transplants, tissue typing is not needed because corneas do not have their own blood supply. This greatly reduces the chance that immune cells will come in contact with the cornea and recognize it as foreign. For this reason, corneas can be transplanted from any person, and there is little chance of rejection.

Normal results Because each person has their own histocompatibility antigen “fingerprint,” there is no true normal result. Each fingerprint is unique. Resources BOOKS

Berkow, Robert, ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. Beutler, E., et al., eds. William’s Hematology. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc. 1995. Henry, J. B. Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods. New York: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996.

John T. Lohr, PhD GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Abscess—A localized area of tissue destruction and pus formation. Adenoids—Masses of lymphoid tissue that are found in the upper throat. Sleep apnea—A condition marked by loud snoring during sleep and periodic episodes of suspended breathing. Tonsils—Oval masses of lymphoid tissue on each side of the throat.

Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy Definition Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy (T & A) are surgical procedures to remove the tonsils from the back of the mouth or adenoids from the back of the nasal cavity—both are are part of the lymphatic system, which is responsible for fighting infection. These operations are often performed together and are usually done on children. T & As are the most common childhood operations.

Purpose Tonsillectomy Tonsils are removed (with or without the adenoids) when the child has any of the following conditions: • obstruction of the upper airway. • sleep apnea. This is a condition in which the child snores loudly and stops breathing temporarily at intervals during sleep. • inability to swallow properly because of enlarged tonsils. • “hot potato” voice (breathy voice) and other speech abnormalities due to enlarged tonsils • recurrent or persistent abscesses or throat infections Doctors do not agree completely on the number of sore throats that make a tonsillectomy necessary. Most would agree that four cases of strep throat in any one year; six or more episodes of tonsillitis in one year; or five or more episodes of tonsillitis per year for two years indicate that the tonsils should be removed. Adenoidectomy Adenoids are removed (with or without the tonsils) when the child has any of the following conditions: • alteration of facial growth because of enlarged adenoids GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• upper airway obstruction • development of an irregular bite (dental malocclusion) • difficult speech or swallowing

Precautions T & As are not performed as frequently today as they were in the past. One reason for a more conservative approach is that there is always some risk involved when a patient is put under general anesthesia. In some cases, a T & A may need to be modified or postponed: • children with cleft palates should not have the adenoids removed • bleeding disorders; these must be brought under control before surgery • acute tonsillitis; surgery should be postponed—usually for three to four weeks—until the infection is gone

Description Tonsillectomies are hospital procedures. In adults, they may be performed under local anesthesia. Children are usually placed under general anesthesia. The doctor depresses the tongue in order to see the throat and removes the tonsils with a scooplike instrument. The adenoids are usually removed through the nose.

Aftercare Patients are turned on the side after the operation to prevent the possibility of blood being drawn into the lungs. The patient’s vital signs are checked. After the patient is fully awake, he or she can drink water and other nonirritating liquids. Adult patients are usually warned to expect some bleeding after the operation and a very sore throat. 3325

Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy

TMJ see Temporomandibular joint disorders Tobramycin see Aminoglycosides; Antibiotics, ophthalmic Tocopherol deficiency see Vitamin E deficiency Toenail removal see Nail removal Tonsil removal see Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy

Tonsillitis

Tonsils

Scalpel

Uvula

Tongue

Toothed forceps

Tongue depressor

Tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy are surgical procedures performed to remove the tonsils or adenoids. The tonsils are removed in cases where they are a source of recurrent infection or have developed an abscess. Both operations are typically performed on children. The illustration above shows a tonsillectomy in progress. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

Antibiotics are given to prevent infection. Medications to relieve pain may also be given. For at least the first 24 hours, the patient is fed soft or pureed foods and fluids. If the adenoids alone were removed, the patient may be allowed solid food the day after surgery. Patients are usually sent home the next day, with instructions to call the doctor if there is bleeding, an earache, or a fever that lasts longer than three days. They are told to expect a white scab to form in the throat between five and 10 days after surgery.

Resources BOOKS

Berman, Stephen, and Ken Chan. “Ear, Nose, & Throat.” In Current Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment, ed. William W. Hay Jr., et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. Markel, Howard, and Frank A. Oski. The Practical Pediatrician: The A to Z Guide to Your Child’s Health, Behavior, and Safety. New York: W. H. Freeman and Co., 1995. “Tonsillitis.” In Professional Guide to Diseases, ed. Stanley Loeb, et al. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1991.

Rebecca J. Frey, PhD

Risks About one in every fifteen thousand tonsillectomies ends in death, either from the anesthesia or from bleeding to death five to seven days after the operation. There is also a chance that children with previously normal speech will develop a nasal-sounding voice. In addition, children younger than five years may be badly emotionally upset by the hospital experience.

Normal results Normal results include the correction of the condition for which the surgery was performed. 3326

Tonsillitis Definition Tonsillitis is an infection and swelling of the tonsils, which are oval-shaped masses of lymph gland tissue located on both sides of the back of the throat.

Description The tonsils normally help to prevent infections. They act like filters to trap bacteria and viruses entering GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tonsillitis

Palatine tonsil Pharyngeal tonsil

Lingual tonsil

Nasal cavity

Tongue

Palatine tonsil Lingual tonsil

The palatine, lingual, and pharyngeal tonsils. (Illustration by Hans & Cassady, Inc.)

the body through the mouth and sinuses. The tonsils also stimulate the immune system to produce antibodies to help fight off infections. Anyone of any age can have tonsillitis; however, it is most common in children between the ages of five and 10 years.

Causes and symptoms Tonsillitis is caused by viruses or bacteria that cause the tonsils to swell and become inflamed. A mild or severe sore throat is one of the first symptoms of tonsillitis. Symptoms can also include fever, chills, tiredness, muscle aches, earache, pain or discomfort when swallowing, and swollen glands in the neck. Very young children may be fussy and stop eating. When a doctor or nurse looks into the mouth with a flashlight, the tonsils may appear swollen and red. Sometimes, the tonsils will have white or yellow spots or flecks or a thin coating. Symptoms usually last four to six days.

Diagnosis The diagnosis of tonsillitis is made from the visible symptoms and a physical examination of the patient. The doctor will examine the eyes, ears, nose, and throat, looking at the tonsils for signs of swelling, redness, or a GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

discharge. A careful examination of the throat is necessary to rule out diphtheria and other conditions that may cause a sore throat. Since most sore throats in children are caused by viruses rather than bacteria, the doctor may take a throat culture in order to test for the presence of streptococcal bacteria. A throat culture is performed by wiping a cotton swab across the tonsils and back of the throat, and sending the swab to a laboratory for culturing. Streptococcus pyogenes, the bacterium that causes strep throat, is the most common disease agent responsible for tonsillitis. Depending on what type of test is used for strep, the doctor may be able to determine within a few minutes if S. pyogenes is present. The quick tests for strep are not as reliable as a laboratory culture, which can take 24–48 hours. If the results of a quick test are positive, however, the doctor can prescribe antibiotics right away. If the quick test results are negative, the doctor can do a throat culture to verify the results and wait for the laboratory report before prescribing antibiotics. A blood test may also be done to rule out a more serious infection or condition, and to check the white blood cell count to see if the body is responding to the infection. In some cases, the doctor may order blood tests for mononucleosis, since about a third of patients with mononucleosis develop streptococcal infections of the tonsils. 3327

Tonsillitis

Lycopodium, Lachesis, Hepar sulphuris, Arsenicum, or Rhus toxicodendron. As with any condition, the treatment and dosage should be appropriate for the particular symptoms and age of the patient.

Prognosis

An examination of this patient’s mouth reveals acute tonsillitis. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

Treatment Treatment of tonsillitis usually involves keeping the patient comfortable while the illness runs its course. This supportive care includes bed rest, drinking extra fluids, gargling with warm salt water, and taking pain relievers—usually NSAIDs—to reduce fever. Frozen juice bars and cold fruit drinks can bring some temporary relief of sore throat pain; drinking warm tea or broth can be soothing. If the throat culture shows that S. pyogenes is present, penicillin or other antibiotics will be prescribed. An injection of benzathine or procaine penicillin may be most effective in treating the infection, but it is also painful. If an oral antibiotic is prescribed, it must be taken for the full course of treatment, usually 10-14 days. If the patient has several episodes of severe tonsillitis, the doctor may recommend a tonsillectomy, which is the surgical removal of the tonsils.

Tonsillitis usually resolves within a few days with rest and supportive care. Treating the symptoms of sore throat and fever will make the patient more comfortable. If fever persists for more than 48 hours, however, or is higher than 102°F, the patient should be seen by a doctor. If antibiotics are prescribed to treat an infection, they should be taken as directed for the complete course of treatment, even if the patient starts to feel better in a few days. Prolonged symptoms may indicate that the patient has other upper respiratory infections, most commonly in the ears or sinuses. An abscess behind the tonsil (a peritonsillar abscess) may also occur. In rare cases, a persistent sore throat may point to more serious conditions, such as rheumatic fever or pneumonia.

Prevention The bacteria and viruses that cause tonsillitis are easily spread from person to person. It is not unusual for an entire family or several students in the same classroom to come down with similar symptoms, especially if S. pyogenes is the cause. The risk of transmission can be lowered by avoiding exposure to anyone who already has tonsillitis or a sore throat. Drinking glasses and eating utensils should not be shared and should be washed in hot, soapy water before reuse. Old toothbrushes should be replaced to prevent reinfection. People who are caring for someone with tonsillitis should wash their hands frequently, to prevent spreading the infection to others.

Alternative treatment Strengthening the immune system is important whether tonsillitis is caused by bacteria or viruses. Naturopaths often recommend dietary supplements of vitamin C, bioflavonoids, and beta-carotenes—found naturally in fruits and vegetables—to ease inflammation and fight infection. A variety of herbal remedies also may be helpful in treating tonsillitis. Calendula (Calendula officinalis) and cleavers (Galium aparine) target the lymphatic system, while echinacea (Echinacea spp.) and astragalus (Astragalus membranaceus) stimulate the immune system. Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), myrrh (Commiphora molmol), and bitter orange act as antibacterials. Lomatium dissectum and Ligusticum porteri have an antiviral action. Some of the homeopathic medicines that may be used to treat symptoms of tonsillitis include Belladonna, Phytolacca, Mercurius, 3328

Resources BOOKS

“Ear, Nose, and Throat Disorders: Tonsillitis.” In Diseases, ed. Margaret Eckman and Nancy Priff. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1997. “Pharyngitis & Tonsillitis.” In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1998. 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. “Tonsillitis.” In The Consumer’s Medical Desk Reference, ed. Charles B. Inlander and the staff of the People’s Medical Society. New York: A Stonesong Press Book, 1995. Shaw, Michael, ed. Everything You Need to Know About Diseases. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1996. “Tonsillitis.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. “Tonsillitis.” In Professional Guide to Diseases. 5th ed. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1995. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Streptococcus pyogenes—A common bacterium that causes strep throat and can also cause tonsillitis. Tonsillectomy—A surgical procedure to remove the tonsils if the patient has recurrent sore throats or throat infections, or if the tonsils have become so swollen that the patient has trouble breathing or swallowing. Tonsils—Oval-shaped masses of glandular tissue located on both sides at the back of the throat. Tonsils act like filters to trap bacteria and viruses.

PERIODICALS

Sataloff, Robert Thayer. “Treating Common Disorders of the Voice.” Hospital Medicine 33 (1997): 47-60. OTHER

“Tonsillitis.” Kids Health Page. .

Altha Roberts Edgren

Tooth decay Definition Tooth decay, which is also called dental cavities or dental caries, is the destruction of the outer surface (enamel) of a tooth. Decay results from the action of bacteria that live in plaque, which is a sticky, whitish film formed by a protein in saliva (mucin) and sugary substances in the mouth. The plaque bacteria sticking to tooth enamel use the sugar and starch from food particles in the mouth to produce acid.

Description Tooth decay is a common health problem, second in prevalence only to the common cold. It has been estimated that 90% of people in the United States have at least one cavity and that 75% of people had their first cavity by the age of five. Although anyone can have a problem with tooth decay, children and senior citizens are the two groups at highest risk. Other high-risk groups include people who eat a lot of starchy and sugary foods; people living in areas without a fluoridated water supply; and people who already have numerous dental restorations (fillings and crowns). GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Baby bottle tooth decay is a dental problem that frequently develops in infants that are put to bed with a bottle containing a sweet liquid. Baby bottle tooth decay is also called nursing-bottle caries and bottle-mouth syndrome. Bottles containing such liquids as milk, formula, fruit juices, sweetened drink mixes, and sugar water continuously bathe an infant’s mouth with sugar during naps or at night. The bacteria in the mouth use this sugar to produce acid that destroys the child’s teeth. The upper front teeth are typically the ones most severely damaged; the lower front teeth receive some protection from the tongue. Pacifiers dipped in sugar, honey, corn syrup, or other sweetened liquid also contribute to bottle-mouth syndrome. The first signs of damage are chalky white spots or lines across the teeth. As decay progresses, the damage to the child’s teeth becomes obvious.

Causes and symptoms Tooth decay requires the simultaneous presence of three factors: plaque bacteria, sugar, and a vulnerable tooth surface. Although several microorganisms found in the mouth can cause tooth decay, the primary disease agent appears to be Streptococcus mutans. The sugars used by the bacteria are simple sugars such as glucose, sucrose, and lactose. They are converted primarily into lactic acid. When this acid builds up on an unprotected tooth surface, it dissolves the minerals in the enamel, creating holes and weak spots (cavities). As the decay spreads inward into the middle layer (the dentin), the tooth becomes more sensitive to temperature and touch. When the decay reaches the center of the tooth (the pulp), the resulting inflammation (pulpitis) produces a toothache.

Diagnosis Tooth decay develops at varying rates. It may be found during a routine six-month dental checkup before the patient is even aware of a problem. In other cases, the patient may experience common early symptoms, such as sensitivity to hot and cold liquids or localized discomfort after eating very sweet foods. The dentist or dental hygienist may suspect tooth decay if a dark spot or a pit is seen during a visual examination. Front teeth may be inspected for decay by shining a light from behind the tooth. This method is called transillumination. Areas of decay, especially between the teeth, will appear as noticeable shadows when teeth are transilluminated. X rays may be taken to confirm the presence and extent of the decay. The dentist then makes the final clinical diagnosis by probing the enamel with a sharp instrument. Tooth decay in pits and fissures may be differentiated from dark shadows in the crevices of the chewing sur3329

Tooth decay

Baby bottle tooth decay

Tooth decay

Nerve

Cavity

Gum Gingiva

Pulp Bone Periodontal membrane

Normal tooth

Tooth with cavity

Tooth decay is the destruction of the outer surface, or enamel, of a tooth. It is caused by acid buildup from plaque bacteria, which dissolves the minerals in the enamel and creates cavities. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

faces by a dye that selectively stains parts of the tooth that have lost mineral content. A dentist can also use this dye to tell whether all tooth decay has been removed from a cavity before placing a filling. Diagnosis in children Damage caused by baby bottle tooth decay is often not diagnosed until the child has a severe problem, because parents seldom bring infants and toddlers in for dental check-ups. Dentists want to initially examine primary teeth between 12 and 24 months. Children still drinking from a bottle anytime after their first birthday are likely to have tooth decay.

Treatment To treat most cases of tooth decay in adults, the dentist removes all decayed tooth structure, shapes the sides of the cavity, and fills the cavity with an appropriate material, such as silver amalgam or composite resin. The filling is put in to restore and protect the tooth. If decay has attacked the pulp, the dentist or a specialist called an endodontist may perform root canal treatment and cover the tooth with a crown. In cases of baby bottle tooth decay, the dentist must assess the extent of the damage before deciding on the 3330

treatment method. If the problem is caught early, the teeth involved can be treated with fluoride, followed by changes in the infant’s feeding habits and better oral hygiene. Primary teeth with obvious decay in the enamel that has not yet progressed to the pulp need to be protected with stainless steel crowns. Fillings are not usually an option in small children because of the small size of their teeth and the concern of recurrent decay. When the decay has advanced to the pulp, pulling the tooth is often the treatment of choice. Unfortunately, loss of primary teeth at this age may hinder the young child’s ability to eat and speak. It may also have bad effects on the alignment and spacing of the permanent teeth when they come in.

Prognosis With timely diagnosis and treatment, the progression of tooth decay can be stopped without extended pain. If the pulp of the tooth is infected, the infection may be treated with antibiotics prior to root canal treatment or extraction. The longer decay goes untreated, however, the more destructive it becomes and the longer and more intensive the necessary treatment will be. In addition, a patient with two or more areas of tooth decay is at increased risk of developing additional cavities in the future. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

It is easier and less expensive to prevent tooth decay than to treat it. The four major prevention strategies include: proper oral hygiene; fluoride; sealants; and attention to diet. Oral hygiene GENERAL CARE OF THE MOUTH. The best way to prevent tooth decay is to brush the teeth at least twice a day, preferably after every meal and snack, and floss daily. Cavities develop most easily in spaces that are hard to clean. These areas include surface grooves, spaces between teeth, and the area below the gum line. Effective brushing cleans each outer tooth surface, inner tooth surface, and the horizontal chewing surfaces of the back teeth, as well as the tongue. Flossing once a day also helps prevent gum disease by removing food particles and plaque at and below the gum line, as well as between teeth. Patients should visit their dentist every six months for oral examination and professional cleaning. MOUTH CARE IN OLDER ADULTS. Older adults who have lost teeth or had them removed still need to maintain a clean mouth. Bridges and dentures must be kept clean to prevent gum disease. Dentures should be relined and adjusted by a dentist whenever necessary to maintain proper fit. These adjustments help to keep the gums from becoming red, swollen, and tender. MOUTH CARE IN CHILDREN. Parents can easily prevent baby bottle tooth decay by not allowing a child to fall asleep with a bottle containing sweetened liquids. Bottles should be filled only with plain, unsweetened water. The child should be introduced to drinking from a cup around six months of age and weaned from bottles by twelve months. If an infant seems to need oral comfort between feedings, a pacifier specially designed for the mouth may be used. Pacifiers, however, should never be dipped in honey, corn syrup, or other sweet liquids. After the eruption of the first tooth, parents should begin routinely wiping the infant’s teeth and gums with a moist piece of gauze or a soft cloth, especially right before bedtime. Parents may begin brushing a child’s teeth with a small, soft toothbrush at about two years of age, when most of the primary teeth have come in. They should apply only a very small amount (the size of a pea) of toothpaste containing fluoride. Too much fluoride may cause spotting (fluorosis) of the tooth enamel. As the child grows, he or she will learn to handle the toothbrush, but parents should control the application of toothpaste and do the followup brushing until the child is about seven years old.

Fluoride application Fluoride is a natural substance that slows the destruction of enamel and helps to repair minor tooth GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

decay damage by remineralizing tooth structure. Toothpaste, mouthwash, fluoridated public drinking water, and vitamin supplements are all possible sources of fluoride. Children living in areas without fluoridated water should receive 0.5 mg/day of fluoride (0.25 mg/day if using a toothpaste containing fluoride) from three to five years of age, and 1 mg/day from six to 12 years. While fluoride is important for protecting children’s developing teeth, it is also of benefit to older adults with receding gums. It helps to protect their newly exposed tooth surfaces from decay. Older adults can be treated by a dentist with a fluoride solution that is painted onto selected portions of the teeth or poured into a fitted tray and held against all the teeth. Sealants Because fluoride is most beneficial on the smooth surfaces of teeth, sealants were developed to protect the irregular surfaces of teeth. A sealant is a thin plastic coating that is painted over the grooves of chewing surfaces to prevent food and plaque from being trapped there. Sealant treatment is painless because no part of the tooth is removed, although the tooth surface is etched with acid so that the plastic will adhere to the rough surface. Sealants are usually clear or tooth-colored, making them less noticeable than silver fillings. They cost less than fillings and can last up to 10 years, although they should be checked for wear at every dental visit. Children should get sealants on their first permanent “6-year” molars, which come in between the ages of five and seven, and on the second permanent “12year” molars, which come in between the ages of 11 and 14. Sealants should be applied to the teeth shortly after they erupt, before decay can set in. Although sealants have been used in the United States for about 25 years, one survey by the National Institute of Dental Research reported that fewer than 8% of American children have them. Diet The risk of tooth decay can be lowered by choosing foods wisely and eating less often. Foods high in sugar and starch, especially when eaten between meals, increase the risk of cavities. The bacteria in the mouth use sugar and starch to produce the acid that destroys the enamel. The damage increases with more frequent eating and longer periods of eating. For better dental health, people should eat a variety of foods, limit the number of snacks, avoid sticky and overly sweetened foods, and brush often after eating. Drinking water is also beneficial for rinsing food particles from the mouth. Children can be taught to “swish and swallow” if they are unable to brush after lunch at school. Similarly, saliva stimulated during eating 3331

Tooth decay

Prevention

Tooth extraction

KEY TERMS Amalgam—A mixture (alloy) of silver and several other metals, used by dentists to make fillings for cavities.

American Dental Hygienists’ Association. 444 North Michigan Ave., Chicago, IL 60611. (800)847-6718. National Institute of Dental Research. 31 Center Drive, MSC 2190, Building 31, Room 5B49, Bethesda, MD 20892-2190. OTHER

Healthtouch Online Page. .

Caries—The medical term for tooth decay.

Bethany Thivierge

Cavity—A hole or weak spot in the tooth surface caused by decay. Dentin—The middle layer of a tooth, which makes up most of the tooth’s mass. Enamel—The hard, outermost surface of a tooth. Fluoride—A chemical compound containing fluorine that is used to treat water or applied directly to teeth to prevent decay. Mucin—A protein in saliva that combines with sugars in the mouth to form plaque. Plaque—A thin, sticky, colorless film that forms on teeth. Plaque is composed of mucin, sugars from food, and bacteria that live in the plaque. Pulp—The soft, innermost layer of a tooth containing blood vessels and nerves. Sealant—A thin plastic substance that is painted over teeth as an anti-cavity measure to seal out food particles and acids produced by bacteria. Transillumination—A technique of checking for tooth decay by shining a light behind the patient’s teeth. Decayed areas show up as spots or shadows.

makes it more difficult for food and bacteria to stick to tooth surfaces. Saliva also appears to have a buffering effect on the acid produced by the plaque bacteria and to act as a remineralizing agent. Older patients should be made aware that some prescription medications may decrease salivary flow. Less saliva tends to increase the activity of plaque bacteria and encourage further tooth decay. Chewing sugarless gum increases salivation and thus helps to lower the risk of tooth decay. Resources BOOKS

“Dental Caries and Its Complications—Tooth Decay.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. ORGANIZATIONS

American Dental Association. 211 E. Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611. (312) 440-2500. . 3332

Tooth extraction Definition Tooth extraction is the removal of a tooth from its socket in the bone.

Purpose Extraction is performed for positional, structural, or economic reasons. Teeth are often removed because they are impacted. Teeth become impacted when they are prevented from growing into their normal position in the mouth by gum tissue, bone, or other teeth. Impaction is a common reason for the extraction of wisdom teeth. Extraction is the only known method that will prevent further problems. Teeth may also be extracted to make more room in the mouth prior to straightening the remaining teeth (orthodontic treatment), or because they are so badly positioned that straightening is impossible. Extraction may be used to remove teeth that are so badly decayed or broken that they cannot be restored. In addition, patients sometimes choose extraction as a less expensive alternative to filling or placing a crown on a severely decayed tooth.

Precautions In some situations, tooth extractions may need to be postponed temporarily. These situations include: • Infection that has progressed from the tooth into the bone. Infections may make anesthesia difficult. They can be treated with antibiotics before the tooth is extracted. • The patient’s use of drugs that thin the blood (anticoagulants). These medications include warfarin (Coumadin) and aspirin. The patient should stop using these medications for three days prior to extraction. • Patients who have had any of the following procedures in the previous six months: heart valve replacement, open heart surgery, prosthetic joint replacement, or placement of a medical shunt. These patients may be given antibiotics to reduce the risk of bacterial infection. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tooth extraction

KEY TERMS Dry socket—A painful condition following tooth extraction in which a blood clot does not properly fill the empty socket. Dry socket leaves the underlying bone exposed to air and food. Extraction site—The empty tooth socket following removal of the tooth. Impacted tooth—A tooth that is growing against another tooth, bone, or soft tissue. Luxate—To loosen or dislocate the tooth from the socket. Nitrous oxide—A colorless, sweet-smelling gas used by dentists for mild anesthesia. It is sometimes called laughing gas because it makes some patients feel giddy or silly. Oral surgeon—A dentist who specializes in surgical procedures of the mouth, including extractions. Orthodontic treatment—The process of straightening teeth to correct their appearance and function.

Description Tooth extraction can be performed with local anesthesia if the tooth is exposed and appears to be easily removable in one piece. An instrument called an elevator is used to loosen (luxate) the tooth, widen the space in the bone, and break the tiny elastic fibers that attach the tooth to the bone. Once the tooth is dislocated from the bone, it can be lifted and removed with forceps. If the extraction is likely to be difficult, the dentist may refer the patient to an oral surgeon. Oral surgeons are specialists who are trained to give nitrous oxide, an intravenous sedative, or a general anesthetic to relieve pain. Extracting an impacted tooth or a tooth with curved roots typically requires cutting through gum tissue to expose the tooth. It may also require removing portions of bone to free the tooth. Some teeth must be cut and removed in sections. The extraction site may or may not require one or more stitches to close the cut (incision).

Preparation Before an extraction, the dentist will take the patient’s medical history, noting allergies and prescription medications. A dental history is also taken, with particular attention to previous extractions and reactions to anesthetics. The dentist may then prescribe antibiotics or GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

A close-up view inside a person’s mouth following the extraction of the lower right molar. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

recommend stopping certain medications prior to the extraction. The tooth is x-rayed to determine its full shape and position, especially if it is impacted. If the patient is going to have deep anesthesia, he or she should wear loose clothing with sleeves that are easily rolled up to allow for an intravenous line. The patient should not eat or drink anything for at least six hours before the procedure. Arrangements should be made for a friend or relative to drive the patient home after the surgery.

Aftercare An important aspect of aftercare is encouraging a clot to form at the extraction site. The patient should put pressure on the area by biting gently on a roll or wad of gauze for several hours after surgery. Once the clot is formed, it should not be disturbed. The patient should not rinse, spit, drink with a straw, or smoke for at least 24 hours after the extraction and preferably longer. Vigorous exercise should not be done for the first three to five days. For the first two days after the procedure, the patient should drink liquids without using a straw, and eat soft foods. Any chewing must be done on the side away from the extraction site. Hard or sticky foods should be avoided. The mouth may be gently cleaned with a toothbrush, but the extraction area should not be scrubbed. Wrapped ice packs can be applied to reduce facial swelling. Swelling is a normal part of the healing process. It is most noticeable in the first 48–72 hours. As the swelling subsides, the patient may experience muscle stiffness. Moist heat and gentle exercise will restore jaw movement. The dentist may prescribe medications to relieve the postoperative pain. 3333

Tooth replacements and restorations

Risks Potential complications of tooth extraction include postoperative infection, temporary numbness from nerve irritation, jaw fracture, and jaw joint pain. An additional complication is called dry socket. When a blood clot does not properly form in the empty tooth socket, the bone beneath the socket is painfully exposed to air and food, and the extraction site heals more slowly.

Normal results After an extraction, the wound usually closes in about two weeks. It takes three to six months for the bone and soft tissue to be restructured. Complications such as infection or dry socket may prolong the healing time. Resources ORGANIZATIONS

American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. 9700 West Bryn Mawr Ave., Rosemont, IL 60018-5701. (847) 678-6200. .

Bethany Thivierge

Tooth grinding see Bruxism

Tooth replacements and restorations Definition A tooth restoration is any artificial substance or structure that replaces missing teeth or part of a tooth in order to protect the mouth’s ability to eat, chew, and speak. Restorations include fillings, inlays, crowns, bridges, partial and complete dentures, and dental implants.

Purpose Restorations have somewhat different purposes depending on their extensiveness. Fillings, inlays, and crowns are intended to repair damage to individual teeth. They replace tooth structure lost by decay or injury, protect the part of the tooth that remains, and restore the tooth’s shape and function. Bridges, dentures, and implants are intended to protect the shape and function of the mouth as a whole.

Precautions Some patients are allergic to the medications used for local anesthesia in dental restorations. In addition, 3334

many people in the general population are afraid of dental work. Most dentists in present-day practice can help patients with this specific fear.

Description Fillings Fillings are restorations that are done to repair damage caused by tooth decay (dental caries). Tooth decay occurs when microorganisms in the mouth convert sugar from food to acid, which attacks the tooth. The acid forms cavities that start in the hard outer surface of the tooth (the enamel) and may extend inward to the pulp, which contains the tooth’s nerves and blood vessels. Left untreated, tooth decay may lead to inflammation and infection that may cause toothache and perhaps more serious complications. To stop the decay process, the dentist removes the decayed portion of the tooth using a high-speed drill or an air abrasion system, shapes the cavity walls, and replaces the tooth structure with a filling of silver amalgam, composite resin, or gold. The filling is placed in the cavity as a liquid or soft solid. It sets within a few minutes and continues to harden over the next several hours. Silver amalgam is commonly used to fill cavities on the biting surfaces of the back teeth, because it is strong enough to withstand the tremendous pressures exerted by grinding and chewing. Composite resin is typically used to fill cavities in front teeth and any other teeth that are visible when the patient smiles, because its color can be matched to the tooth surface. Gold as a filling material is far less common, but is being increasingly used. Although it is more expensive and less easily applied, it does not trigger the sensitivity reactions that some patients have to silver amalgam. Inlays An inlay resembles a filling in that it fills the space remaining after the decayed portion of a tooth has been removed. The difference is that an inlay is shaped outside the patient’s mouth and then cemented into place. After the decay is removed and the cavity walls are shaped, the dentist makes a wax pattern of the space. A mold is cast from the wax pattern. An inlay, usually of gold, is made from this mold and sealed into the tooth with dental cement. Crowns The crown of a tooth is the portion that is covered by enamel. A restorative crown replaces this outer part to protect the tooth. This protection becomes necessary when a tooth cracks or has its entire structure weakened by decay. As with a filling or inlay, the dentist first removes the decayed portion of the tooth. The tooth is GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Bridges Bridges are a type of restoration that is done when one or more permanent teeth are lost or pulled. The resulting gap must be filled in to prevent the remaining teeth from shifting. If the other teeth shift, they will affect the patient’s bite (occlusion), which sometimes produces pain in the jaw joint. As the teeth move and become crooked, they also become more difficult to keep clean. The risk of tooth decay and gum disease increases, increasing the likelihood that additional teeth will be lost. A bridge is inserted to prevent this risk. Bridges are nonremovable appliances of one or more artificial teeth (pontics) anchored by crowns on the adjacent teeth (abutment teeth). The abutment teeth carry the pressure when the patient chews food. Partial dentures A partial denture is similar to a bridge in that it fills a gap left by missing teeth with artificial teeth on a metal frame. A partial denture is removable, however. It attaches to a crown on the abutment tooth with a metal clasp or precision attachment. A partial denture is primarily used at the end of a row of natural teeth, where there is only one abutment tooth. The pressure exerted by chewing is shared by this abutment and the soft tissues of the gum ridge beneath the appliance. Complete dentures Complete dentures may be worn when all of the top or bottom teeth have been lost. A complete denture consists of artificial teeth mounted in a plastic base molded to fit the remaining oral anatomy. It may or may not be held in place with a denture adhesive. Implants Dental implants are a means of securing crowns, bridges, and dentures in the mouth. A hard plastic or metal fixture is implanted through the soft tissue into the bone. Over time, the bone grows around this fixture, firmly anchoring it. The exposed end of this fixture is covered with a crown and may serve as a stable abutment for a bridge or denture. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Preparation Before a restoration is placed in the mouth, the dentist removes all traces of decay and shapes the remaining tooth structure for the restoration. Fillings are the only restoration created within the tooth itself—the others are made up in a laboratory using a model of the tooth structure. Thus, a filling may be placed in a single dental visit, while the other restorations usually take several appointments. Temporary crowns and dentures are put in place after the tooth is shaped until the permanent restoration is delivered by the laboratory.

Aftercare Fillings Fillings need time to harden for several hours after being placed, so the patient should chew food on the opposite side of the mouth for the first day. Dentures A partial or complete denture may take several weeks of getting used to. Inserting and removing the denture will take practice. Speaking clearly may be difficult at first—the patient may find it helpful to read out loud for practice. Eating may also feel awkward. The patient should begin by eating small pieces of soft foods. Very hard or sticky foods should be avoided. Patients with dentures must work on good oral hygiene. Specialty brushes and floss threaders may be used to remove plaque and food from around crowns and bridges. Dentures should be removed and brushed daily with a specially designed brush and a denture cleaner or other mild soap. The patient should see the dentist for an adjustment if there is any discomfort or irritation resulting from a restoration. Otherwise, the patient should see the dentist at least twice a year for an oral examination.

Risks Restoration procedures typically require local anesthesia. Some people may have allergic reactions to the medication. A very small number of people are allergic to one or more of the metals used in a dental restoration. In most cases, the dentist can use another material.

Normal results A well-made restoration should feel comfortable and last a relatively long time with proper care. Artificial dental restorations only approximate the original tooth, however. A complete denture will never feel as comfortable or work 3335

Tooth replacements and restorations

then prepared for a crown. It may be tapered on the outside edges to a peg, reinforced with a cast metal core, or rebuilt with both a cast metal core and a post. A wax impression of the prepared tooth and the teeth next to it is made. The new crown is made to fit this mold. The crown may be made of gold or stainless steel alone, metal with a veneer of tooth-colored porcelain or resin, or of porcelain or resin alone. The finished crown is then placed over the prepared tooth, adjusted, and cemented into place.

Toothache

KEY TERMS

American Dental Association. 211 E. Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611. (312) 440-2500. .

Bethany Thivierge

Abutment tooth—A crowned tooth that stabilizes a bridge or partial denture. Bridge—An appliance of one or more artificial teeth anchored by crowns on the adjacent teeth. Complete denture—A full set of upper or lower teeth, mounted in a plastic base. Dentures are also called false teeth. Crown—A protective shell that fits over the tooth. Dental caries—A disease of the teeth in which microorganisms convert sugar in the mouth to acid that erodes the tooth. Enamel—The hard outermost surface of a tooth. Filling—Dental material that occupies the space remaining within a tooth after the decayed portion has been removed. Implant—A fixture with one end implanted into the bone and the other end covered with a crown, often to serve as a stable abutment for a bridge or denture. Inlay—A filling that is made outside of the tooth and the cemented into place. Occlusion—The way upper and lower teeth fit together during biting and chewing. Partial denture—A removable bridge that usually clasps onto only one abutment. Pontic—An artificial tooth. Pulp—The soft innermost layer of a tooth that contains its blood vessels and nerves.

Toothache Definition A toothache is any pain or soreness within or around a tooth, indicating inflammation and possible infection.

Description A toothache may feel like a sharp pain or a dull ache. The tooth may be sensitive to pressure, heat, cold, or sweets. In cases of severe pain, identifying the problem tooth is often difficult. Any patient with a toothache should see a dentist at once for diagnosis and treatment. Most toothaches get worse if not treated.

Causes and symptoms Toothaches may result from any of a number of causes: • tooth decay (dental caries) • inflammation of the tooth pulp (pulpitis) • abscesses • gum disease, including periodontitis • loose or broken filling • cracked or impacted tooth • exposed tooth root

as well as natural teeth. It is better, therefore, to prevent the need for restorative dental work than to replace teeth. Restorations are expensive, may require many appointments, and still need careful cleaning and attention.

• food wedged between teeth or trapped below the gum line • tooth nerve irritated by clenching or grinding of teeth (bruxism) • pressure from congested sinuses

Resources

• traumatic injury

BOOKS

“Dentistry in Medicine—Dental Restorations and Appliances.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. ORGANIZATIONS

Academy of General Dentistry. Suite 1200, 211 East Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611. (312) 440-4300. . 3336

Diagnosis Diagnosis includes identifying the location of the toothache, as well as the cause. The dentist begins by asking the patient specific questions about the toothache, including the types of foods that make the pain worse, whether the tooth is sensitive to temperature or biting, and whether the pain is worse at night. The dentist then examGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Treatment Emergency self-care Toothaches should always be professionally treated by a dentist. Some methods of self-treatment, however, may help manage the pain until professional care is available: • rinsing with warm salt water • using dental floss to remove any food particles • taking aspirin or acetaminophen (Tylenol) to relieve pain; the drug should be swallowed—never placed directly on the aching tooth or gum • applying a cold compress against the outside of the cheek; do not use heat, because it will tend to spread infection • using clove oil (Syzygium aromaticum) to numb the gums; the oil may be rubbed directly on the sore area or used to soak a small piece of cotton and applied to the sore tooth Professional care Treatment will depend on the underlying cause of the toothache. If the pain is due to tooth decay, the dentist will remove the decayed area and restore the tooth with a filling of silver amalgam or composite resin. Loose or broken fillings are removed, new decay cleaned out, and a new filling is placed. If the pulp of the tooth is damaged, root canal therapy is needed. The dentist or a specialist called an endodontist removes the decayed pulp, fills the space left behind with a soothing paste, and covers the tooth with a crown to protect and seal it. If the damage cannot be treated by these methods, or if the tooth is impacted, the tooth must be extracted.

Alternative treatment Toothaches caused by infection or tooth decay must be treated by a dentist. Several alternative therapies may be helpful for pain relief until dental treatment is availGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Abscess—A hole in the tooth or gum tissue filled with pus as the result of infection. Bruxism—Habitual clenching and grinding of the teeth as a result of stress. The behavior usually occurs during sleep. Cavity—A hole or weak spot in the tooth surface caused by decay. Dental caries—A disease of the teeth in which microorganisms convert sugar in the mouth to acid, which then erodes the tooth. Enamel—The hard outermost surface of a tooth. Endodontist—A dentist who specializes in diagnosing and treating diseases of the pulp and other inner parts of the tooth. Impacted tooth—A tooth that is growing against another tooth, bone, or soft tissue. Periodontitis—A gum disease that destroys the structures supporting the teeth, including bone. Pulp—The soft innermost part of a tooth, containing blood vessels and nerves. Pulpitis—Inflammation of the pulp of a tooth that involves the blood vessels and nerves.

able. Clove oil (Syzygium aromaticum) may be rubbed on sensitive gums to numb them or added to a small cotton pellet that is then placed into or over a hole in the tooth. The herb corydalis (Corydalis yanhusuo) may also help relieve toothache pain. Pain also may be reduced using acupressure, acupuncture, or reiki. Acupuncture should be done only by a licensed practitioner.

Prognosis Prompt dental treatment provides a positive outcome for toothache. In the absence of active infection, fillings, root canal treatments, or extractions may be performed with minimal discomfort to the patient. When a toothache is left untreated, a severe infection may develop and spread to the sinuses or jawbone, and eventually cause blood poisoning.

Prevention Maintaining proper oral hygiene is the key to preventing toothaches. The best way to prevent tooth decay is to brush at least twice a day, preferably after every 3337

Toothache

ines the patient’s mouth for signs of swelling, redness, and obvious tooth damage. The presence of pus indicates an abscess or gum disease. The dentist may flush the sore area with warm water to dislodge any food particles and to test for sensitivity to heat. The dentist may then dry the area with gauze to determine sensitivity to touch and pressure. The dentist may probe tooth crevices and the edges of fillings with a sharp instrument, looking for areas of tooth decay. Finally, the dentist may take x rays, looking for evidence of decay between teeth, a cracked or impacted tooth, or a disorder of the underlying bone.

TORCH test

meal and snack. Flossing once a day also helps prevent gum disease by removing food particles and bacteria at and below the gum line, as well as between teeth. People should visit their dentist at least every six months for oral examinations and professional cleaning. Resources ORGANIZATIONS

Academy of General Dentistry. Suite 1200, 211 East Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611. (312) 440-4300. . American Dental Association. 211 E. Chicago Ave., Chicago, IL 60611. (312) 440-2500. . OTHER

Medical Source. Medical Alliances, Inc. 2121 Eisenhower Ave., Suite 603, Alexandria, VA 22314. (800) 463-6482 .

Bethany Thivierge

Topical antibiotics see Antibiotics, topical Topical antifungal drugs see Antifungal drugs, topical

Purpose The five categories of organisms whose antibodies are measured by the TORCH test are grouped together because they can cause a cluster of symptomatic birth defects in newborns. This group of defects is sometimes called the TORCH syndrome. A newborn baby with these symptoms will be given a TORCH test to see if any of the five types of infection are involved. The symptoms of the TORCH syndrome include: • Small size in proportion to length of the mother’s pregnancy at time of delivery. Infants who are smaller than would be expected (below the tenth percentile) are referred to as small-for-gestational-age, or SGA. • Enlarged liver and spleen • Low level of platelets in the blood • Skin rash. The type of skin rash associated with the TORCH syndrome is usually reddish-purple or brown and is caused by the leakage of blood from broken capillaries into the baby’s skin. • Involvement of the central nervous system. These defects can include encephalitis, calcium deposits in the brain tissue, and seizures. • Jaundice. The yellowish discoloration of the skin and whites of the eyes due to liver disease.

TORCH test Definition The TORCH test, which is sometimes called the TORCH panel, belongs to a category of blood tests called infectious-disease antibody titer tests. This type of blood test measures the presence of antibodies (protein molecules produced by the human immune system in response to a specific disease agent) and their level of concentration in the blood. The name of the test comes from the initial letters of the five disease categories. The TORCH test measures the levels of an infant’s antibodies against five groups of chronic infections: toxoplasmosis, other infections, rubella, cytomegalovirus (CMV), and herpes simplex virus (HSV). The “other infections” usually include syphilis, hepatitis B, coxsackie virus, Epstein-Barr virus, varicella-zoster virus, and human parvovirus. Since the TORCH test is a screening or first-level test, the pediatrician may order tests of other body fluids or tissues to confirm the diagnosis of a specific infection. In the case of toxoplasmosis, rubella, and syphilis, cerebrospinal fluid may be obtained from the infant through a spinal tap in order to confirm the diagnosis. In the case of CMV, the diagnosis is confirmed by culturing the virus in a sample of the infant’s urine. In HSV infections, tissue culture is the best method to confirm the diagnosis. 3338

In addition to these symptoms, each of the TORCH infections has its own characteristic symptom cluster in newborns: Toxoplasmosis Toxoplasmosis is caused by Toxoplasma gondii, a parasite that the mother can acquire from handling infected cats, drinking unpasteurized milk, or eating contaminated meat. The infection is carried to the infant through the mother’s placenta, and can cause infections of the eyes or central nervous system. The organism can invade brain or muscle tissue and form tissue cysts. The later in pregnancy that the mother is infected, the higher the probability that the fetus will be infected. On the other hand, toxoplasmosis early in pregnancy is more likely to cause a miscarriage or serious birth defects. The incidence of toxoplasmosis in newborns is one in 1,000 live births. Other (syphilis) Syphilis is caused by a spirochete (spiral- or coilshaped bacterium), Treponema pallidum. It is transmitted in the adult population by sexual intercourse. About 25% of children born to mothers diagnosed with syphilis will have the disease at birth. Syphilis was added to the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Rubella Rubella is a virus that has a seasonal pattern, with epidemics most likely in the spring. Between 0.1-2% of newborns will be infected with rubella. The rate of fetal infection varies according to the timing of the mother’s infection during pregnancy. Birth defects, however, are most likely (85%) in infants infected during the first eight weeks of pregnancy. Infants born with rubella may already show signs of heart disease, retarded growth, hearing loss, blood disorders, vision problems, or pneumonia. They may also develop problems later in childhood, including autism, hearing loss, brain syndromes, immune system disorders, or thyroid disease. Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Cytomegalovirus belongs to the herpesvirus group of infections. It can be transmitted through body secretions, as well as by sexual contact; some newborns acquire CMV through the mother’s breast milk. In adults, it produces symptoms resembling those of mononucleosis. About 1–2.2% of newborns in the United States are infected with CMV. Of this group, 10% will have measurable symptoms. The mortality rate for these symptomatic newborns is 20–30%. Surviving infants with CMV may suffer from hearing problems (15%) or mental retardation (30%). Newborns that acquire CMV during the birth process or shortly after birth may develop pneumonia, hepatitis, or various blood disorders. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) Herpesvirus infections are among the most common viral infections in humans. They are spread by oral, as well as genital, contact. It is estimated that between 1 in 1,000 and 1 in 5,000 infants are born with HSV infections. About 80% of these infections are acquired during the birth process itself; the virus enters the infant through its eyes, skin, mouth, and upper respiratory tract. Of infants born with HSV infection, about 20% will have localized infections of the eyes, mouth, or skin. About 50% of infected infants will develop disease spread throughout the body (disseminated) within nine to 11 days after birth. Disseminated herpes infections attack the liver and adrenal glands, as well as other body organs. Without treatment, the mortality rate is 80%. Even with antiviral medication, the mortality rate is still 15–20%, with 40–55% of the survivors having long-term GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

damage to the central nervous system. It is critical for the doctor to diagnose HSV infection in the newborn as soon as possible, for effective treatment.

Description The TORCH panel requires a sample of the infant’s blood. Samples from infants are usually obtained by the heelstick procedure when only a small quantity of blood is needed. The baby’s foot is wrapped in a warm cloth for five minutes, to make the blood flow more easily. The foot is then wiped with an alcohol swab and a lancet is used to stick the baby’s heel on one side. It is important to avoid the center of the heel, in order to prevent an inflammation of the bone.

Preparation No special preparation, other than sterile technique, is required.

Risks The only complications associated with the TORCH test are those resulting from the heelstick technique itself. These risks include scarring, infection of the bone, cellulitis (inflammation of cellular tissue), small lumpy calcium deposits, and inaccurate test results.

Normal results The normal result would be normal levels of immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibody in the infant’s blood. IgM is one of five types of protein molecules found in blood that function as antibodies. IgM is a specific class of antibodies that seeks out virus particles. In contrast to adults, IgM is the most common type of immunoglobulin in newborn children. It is, therefore, the most useful indicator of the presence of a TORCH infection.

Abnormal results The general abnormal, or positive, finding would be high levels of IgM antibody. The test can be refined further for antibodies specific to given disease agents. The TORCH screen, however, can produce both false-positive and false-negative findings. Doctors can measure IgM levels in the infant’s cerebrospinal fluid, as well as in the blood, if they want to confirm the TORCH results. Resources BOOKS

Cruse, Julius M., and Robert E. Lewis. Illustrated Dictionary of Immunology. New York: CRC Press, 1995. “Infectious Diseases: TORCH Infections.” In Neonatology: Management, Procedures, On-Call Problems, Diseases 3339

TORCH test

TORCH panel because of a rapid increase in reported cases since 1990. It is also a potentially life-threatening infection for the fetus. Syphilis can cause early delivery, miscarriage, or stillbirth. The mortality rate in infants infected with syphilis is about 54%.

Torticollis

KEY TERMS Antibody—A protein molecule produced by the immune system that is specific to a disease agent, such as CMV and the other organisms sought by the TORCH test. The antibody combines with the organism and disables it. Perinatal—Referring to the period of time surrounding an infant’s birth, from the last two months of pregnancy to the first 28 days of life. The TORCH panel tests for perinatal infections. Small-for-gestational-age (SGA)—A term used to describe newborns who are below the 10th percentile in height or weight for their estimated gestational age. The gestational age is based upon the date of the mother’s last menstrual period. SGA is one of the symptoms of TORCH syndrome. Titer—The concentration of a substance in a given sample of blood or other tissue fluid.

and Drugs, ed. Tricia Lacy Gomella, et al. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. Levin, Myron J. “Infections: Viral & Rickettsial.” In Current Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment, ed. William W. Hay Jr., et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. “Pediatrics and Genetics: Disturbances in Newborns and Infants.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. “Procedures: Heelstick (Capillary Blood Sampling).” In Neonatology: Management, Procedures, On-Call Problems, Diseases and Drugs, ed. Tricia Lacy Gomella, et al. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994.

Rebecca J. Frey, PhD

Torticollis Definition Torticollis (cervical dystonia or spasmodic torticollis) is a type of movement disorder in which the muscles controlling the neck cause sustained twisting or frequent jerking.

Description In torticollis, certain muscles controlling the neck undergo repetitive or sustained contraction, causing the 3340

neck to jerk or twist to the side. Cervical dystonia causes forward twisting, and is called antecollis. Backward twisting is known as retrocollis. The abnormal posture caused by torticollis is often debilitating, and is usually painful. Torticollis most commonly begins between age 30–60, with females affected twice as often as males. According to the National Spasmodic Torticollis Association, torticollis affects 83,000 people in the United States. Dystonia tends to become more severe during the first months or years after onset, and may spread to other regions, especially the jaw, arm, or leg. Torticollis should not be confused with such other causes of abnormal neck posture as orthopedic or congenital problems.

Causes and symptoms The nerve signals responsible for torticollis are thought to originate in the basal ganglia, a group of brain structures involved in movement control. The exact defect is unknown. Some cases of dystonia are due to the inheritance of a defective gene, whose function was unknown as of mid-1998. Other cases are correlated with neck or head trauma, such as from an automobile accident. Use of certain antipsychotic drugs, or neuroleptics, can induce dystonia. There are three types of torticollis: • tonic, in which the abnormal posture is sustained • clonic, marked by jerky head movements. • mixed, a combination of tonic and clonic movements Symptoms usually begin gradually, and may be intermittent at first, worsening in times of stress. Symptoms usually progress over two to five years, and then remain steady. Symptoms may be relieved somewhat when lying down. Many people with torticollis can temporarily correct their head position by sensory tricks, as touching the chin or cheek on the side opposite the turning. The reason for the effectiveness of this “geste antagoniste,” as it is called, is unknown. Pain in the neck, back, or shoulder affects more than two-thirds of all people with torticollis. Pain may spread to the arm or hand.

Diagnosis Diagnosis of torticollis is aided by an electrical study (electromyography) that can detect overactive muscles. Imaging studies, including x rays, may be done to rule out other causes of abnormal posture. A detailed medical history is needed to determine possible causes, including trauma. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

A variety of oral drugs are available to relax muscles, including baclofen. For a subgroup of patients, Ldopa provides effective relief. Denervation of the involved neck muscles may be performed with injection of alcohol or phenol on to the nerve. Injection of botulinum toxin (BTX) is considered by many to be the treatment of choice. By preventing release of chemical messages from the nerve endings that stimulate the involved muscles, BTX partially paralyzes the muscles, therefore allowing more normal posture and range of motion. BTX treatment lasts several months, and may be repeated. Physical therapy can help relieve secondary consequences of torticollis. Regular muscle stretching prevents contracture, or permanent muscle shortening. Pain and spasm may be temporarily lessened with application of heat or ice. Stress management techniques may help prevent worsening. An occupational therapist can suggest home or work modifications to reduce fatigue and improve function. Braces constructed to replace the patient’s own sensory tricks may help reduce abnormal posture.

Alternative treatment Biofeedback may be effective for some patients. Regular massage therapy can reduce additional pain in compensating areas of the body. Two energy-based therapies, acupuncture and homeopathic medicine, can work to rebalance the whole person, helping to correct the torticollis. Antispasmodic herbs may help to relax the muscles. In addition, herbs that can help balance the stimulus from the nervous system are often recommended.

Prognosis Spontaneous remission is seen in up to 20% of patients, most often those patients with older onset and milder symptoms. Dystonia may spread to affect other regions of the body.

Prevention There is no way known to prevent torticollis. Resources BOOKS

Watts, R. L., and W. C. Koller, eds. Movement Disorders. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. ORGANIZATIONS

National Spasmodic Torticollis Association. P.O. Box 5849, Orange, CA 92863-5849. (800) 487-8385. . GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Worldwide Education and Awareness for Movement Disorders. One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1052, New York, NY 10029. (800) 437-6683. .

Richard Robinson

Total protein test see Protein components test

Tourette syndrome Definition Tourette syndrome (TS) is an inherited disorder of the nervous system, characterized by a variable expression of unwanted movements and noises (tics).

Description The first references in the literature to what might today be classified as Tourette syndrome largely describe individuals who were wrongly believed to be possessed by the devil. In 1885 Gilles de la Tourette, a French neurologist, provided the first formal description of this syndrome, which he described as an inherited neurological condition characterized by motor and vocal tics. Although vocal and motor tics are the hallmark of Tourette syndrome, such other symptoms as the expression of socially inappropriate comments or behaviors, obsessive compulsive disorder, attention deficit disorder, self-injuring behavior, depression, and anxiety also appear to be associated with Tourette syndrome. Most research suggests that Tourette syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder, although a gene responsible for Tourette syndrome has not yet been discovered. Tourette syndrome is found in all populations and all ethnic groups, but is three to four times more common in males than females and is more common in children than adults. The exact frequency of Tourette syndrome is unknown, but estimates range from 0.05% to 3%.

Causes and symptoms The cause of Tourette syndrome is unknown, although some studies suggest that the tics in Tourette syndrome are caused by an increased amount of a neurotransmitter called dopamine. A neurotransmitter is a chemical found in the brain that helps to transmit information from one brain cell to another. Other studies suggest that the defect in Tourette syndrome involves another neurotransmitter called serotonin; or involves other chemicals required for normal functioning of the brain. 3341

Tourette syndrome

Treatment

Tourette syndrome

Most studies suggest that Tourette syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder with decreased penetrance, although this hypothesis has not been proven and may not be true in all families. An autosomal dominant disorder results from a change in one copy of a pair of genes. Individuals with an autosomal dominant disorder have a 50% chance of passing on the changed gene to their children. Decreased penetrance means that not all people who inherit the changed gene will develop symptoms. There is some evidence that females who inherit the Tourette syndrome gene have a 70% chance of exhibiting symptoms and males have a 99% chance of having symptoms. It has been suggested that other genetic and environmental factors may play a role in the development of symptoms in people who inherit the changed gene but none have been discovered. Some researchers believe that Tourette syndrome has different causes in different individuals or is caused by changes in more than one gene, although these theories are less substantiated. Further research is needed to establish the cause of Tourette syndrome. Motor and vocal tics The principal symptoms of Tourette syndrome include simple and complex motor and vocal tics. Simple motor tics are characterized by brief muscle contractions of one or more limited muscle groups. An eye twitch is an example of a simple motor tic. Complex motor tics tend to appear more complicated and purposeful than simple tics, and involve coordinated contractions of several muscle groups. Some examples of complex motor tics include the act of hitting oneself and jumping. Copropraxia, the involuntary display of unacceptable/ obscene gestures; and echopraxia, the imitation of the movement of another individual, are other examples of complex motor tics.

and tics can start anytime between infancy and age 18. Initial symptoms usually occur before the early teens; the mean age of onset for both males and females is approximately seven years of age. Most individuals with symptoms initially experience simple muscle tics involving the eyes and the head. These symptoms can progress to tics involving the upper torso, neck, arms, hands, and occasionally the legs and feet. Complex motor tics are usually the latest-onset muscle tics. Vocal tics usually have a later onset then motor tics. In some rare cases, people with Tourette syndrome suddenly present with multiple, severe, or bizarre symptoms. Not only is there extreme variability in clinical symptoms between individuals with Tourette syndrome, but individuals commonly experience a variability in type, frequency, and severity of symptoms over the course of their lifetime. Adolescents with Tourette syndrome often experience unpredictable and variable symptoms, which may be related to fluctuating hormone levels and decreased compliance in taking medications. Adults often experience a decrease in symptoms or a complete end to symptoms. A number of factors appear to affect the severity and frequency of tics. Stress appears to increase the frequency and severity of tics, while concentration on another part of the body that is not involved in a tic can result in the temporary alleviation of symptoms. Relaxation, following attempts to suppress the occurrence of tics, may result in an increased frequency of tics. An increased frequency and severity of tics can also result from exposure to such drugs as steroids, cocaine, amphetamines, and caffeine. Hormonal changes such as those that occur prior to the menstrual cycle can also increase the severity of symptoms. Other associated symptoms

Vocal tics are actually manifestations of motor tics that involve the muscles required for vocalization. Simple vocal tics include stuttering, stammering, abnormal emphasis of part of a word or phrase, and inarticulate noises such as throat clearing, grunts, and high-pitched sounds. Complex vocal tics typically involve the involuntary expression of words. Perhaps the most striking example of this is coprolalia, the involuntary expression of obscene words or phrases, which occurs in fewer than one-third of people with Tourette syndrome. The involuntary echoing of the last word, phrase, sentence or sound vocalized by oneself (phalilalia) or of another person or sound in the environment (echolalia) are also classified as complex tics.

People with Tourette syndrome are more likely to exhibit non-obscene, socially inappropriate behaviors such as expressing insulting or socially unacceptable comments or socially unacceptable actions. It is not known whether these symptoms stem from a more general dysfunction of impulse control that might be part of Tourette syndrome.

The type, frequency, and severity of tics exhibited varies tremendously between individuals with Tourette syndrome. Tourette syndrome has a variable age of onset

People with Tourette syndrome are also at higher risk for having symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). OCD is a disorder characterized by persis-

3342

Tourette syndrome appears to also be associated with attention deficit disorder (ADD). ADD is a disorder characterized by a short attention span and impulsivity, and in some cases hyperactivity. Researchers have found that 21–90% of individuals with Tourette syndrome also exhibit symptoms of ADD, whereas 2–15% of the general population exhibit symptoms of ADD.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Self-injurious behavior (SIB) is also seen more frequently in those with Tourette syndrome. Approximately 34–53% of individuals with Tourette syndrome exhibit some form of self-injuring behavior. The SIB is often related to OCD but can also occur in those with Tourette syndrome who do not have OCD. Symptoms of anxiety and depression are also found more commonly in people with Tourette syndrome. It is not clear, however, whether these symptoms are symptoms of Tourette syndrome or occur as a result of having to deal with the symptoms of moderate to severe Tourette syndrome. People with Tourette syndrome may also be at increased risk for having learning disabilities and personality disorders; and may be more predisposed to such behaviors as aggression, antisocial behaviors, severe temper outbursts, and inappropriate sexual behavior. Further controlled studies need to be performed, however, to ascertain whether these behaviors are symptoms of Tourette syndrome.

Diagnosis Tourette syndrome cannot be diagnosed through a blood test. The diagnosis is made through observation and interview of the patient and discussions with other family members. The diagnosis, of Tourette syndrome is complicated by a variety of factors. The extreme range of symptoms of this disorder makes it difficult to differentiate Tourette syndrome from other disorders with similar symptoms. Diagnosis is further complicated by the fact that some tics appear to be within the range of normal behavior. For example an individual who only exhibits such tics as throat clearing and sniffing may be misdiagnosed with a medical problem such as allergies. In addition, such bizarre and complex tics as coprolalia may be mistaken for psychotic or “bad” behavior. Diagnosis is also confounded by individuals who attempt to control tics in public and in front of health care professionals, and deny the existence of symptoms. Although there is disagreement over what criteria should be used to diagnose Tourette syndrome, one aid in the diagnosis is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV). The DSM-IV outlines suggested GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

diagnostic criteria for a variety of conditions, including Tourette syndrome. DSM-IV criteria: • presence of both motor and vocal tics at some time during the course of the illness • the occurrence of multiple tics nearly every day through a period of more than one year, without a remission of tics for a period of greater than three consecutive months • the symptoms cause distress or impairment in functioning • age of onset of prior to 18 years of age • the symptoms are not due to medications or drugs and are not related to another medical condition Some physicians critique the DSM-IV criteria, arguing that they do not include the full range of behaviors and symptoms seen in Tourette syndrome. Others criticize the criteria since they limit the diagnosis to those who experience a significant impairment, which may not be true for individuals with milder symptoms. For this reason many physicians use their clinical judgment as well as the DSMIV criteria as a guide to diagnosing Tourette syndrome.

Treatment There is no cure for Tourette syndrome. Treatment involves the control of symptoms through educational and psychological interventions and/or medications. The treatment and management of Tourette syndrome varies from patient to patient and should focus on the alleviation of the symptoms that are most bothersome to the patient or that cause the most interference with daily functioning. Psychological and educational interventions Psychological treatments such as counseling are not generally useful for the treatment of tics but can be beneficial in the treatment of such associated symptoms as obsessive-compulsive behavior and attention deficit disorder. Counseling may also help individuals to cope better with the symptoms of this disorder and to have more positive social interactions. Psychological interventions may also help people cope better with stressors that can normally be triggers for tics and negative behaviors. Relaxation therapies may, however, increase the occurrence of tics. The education of family members, teachers, and peers about Tourette syndrome can be helpful and may help to foster acceptance and prevent social isolation. Medications Many people with mild symptoms of Tourette syndrome never require medications. Those with severe 3343

Tourette syndrome

tent, intrusive, and senseless thoughts (obsessions) or compulsions to perform repetitive behaviors that interfere with normal functioning. A person with OCD, for example, may be obsessed with germs and may counteract this obsession with continual hand washing. Symptoms of OCD are present in 1.9–3% of the general population, whereas 28–50% of people with Tourette syndrome have symptoms of OCD.

Tourette syndrome

symptoms may require medications for all or part of their lifetime. The most effective treatment of tics associated with Tourette syndrome involves the use of drugs such as haloperidol, pimozide, sulpiride, and tiapride, which decrease the amount of dopamine in the body. Unfortunately, the incidence of side effects, even at low dosages, is quite high. The short-term side effects can include sedation, dysphoria, weight gain, movement abnormalities, depression, and poor school performance. Long-term side effects can include phobias, memory difficulties, and personality changes. These drugs are therefore better candidates for short-term rather than long-term therapy. Tourette syndrome can also be treated with such other drugs as clonidine, clonazepam, and risperidone, but the efficacy of these treatments is unknown. In many cases, treatment of such associated conditions as ADD and OCD is often more of a concern than the tics themselves. Clonidine used in conjunction with such stimulants as Ritalin may be useful for treating people with Tourette syndrome who also have symptoms of ADD. Stimulants should be used with caution in individuals with Tourette syndrome since they can sometimes increase the frequency and severity of tics. OCD symptoms in those with Tourette syndrome are often treated with such drugs as Prozac, Luvox, Paxil, and Zoloft. In many cases the treatment of Tourette syndrome with medications can be discontinued after adolescence. Trials should be performed through the gradual tapering off of medications and should always be done under a doctor’s supervision.

Prognosis The prognosis for Tourette syndrome in individuals without associated psychological conditions is often quite good, and only approximately 10% of Tourette syndrome individuals experience severe tic symptoms. Approximately 30% of people with Tourette syndrome will experience a decrease in the frequency and severity of tics, and another 30–40% will experience a complete end of symptoms by late adolescence. The other 30–40% will continue to exhibit moderate to severe symptoms in adulthood. There does not appear to be a definite correlation between the type, frequency, and severity of symptoms and the eventual prognosis. Patients with severe tics may experience social difficulties and may isolate themselves from others in fear of shocking and embarrassing them. People with Tourette syndrome who have such other symptoms as obsessive compulsive disorder, attention deficit disorder, and self-injurious behavior usually have a poorer prognosis. 3344

KEY TERMS Attention deficit disorder (ADD)—Disorder characterized by a short attention span, impulsivity, and in some cases hyperactivity. Autosomal dominant—A pattern of genetic inheritance in which only one abnormal gene is needed to display the trait or disease. Coprolalia—The involuntary obscene words or phrases.

expression

of

Copropraxia—The involuntary display of unacceptable/obscene gestures. Decreased penetrance—Individuals who inherit a changed disease gene but do not develop symptoms. Dysphoria—Feelings of anxiety, restlessness, and dissatisfaction. Echolalia—Involuntary echoing of the last word, phrase, or sentence spoken by someone else or sound in the environment. Echopraxia—The imitation of the movement of another individual. Neurotransmitter—Chemical in the brain that transmits information from one nerve cell to another. Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)—Disorder characterized by persistent, intrusive, and senseless thoughts (obsessions) or compulsions to perform repetitive behaviors that interfere with normal functioning. Phalilalia—Involuntary echoing of the last word, phrase, sentence, or sound vocalized by oneself. Tic—Brief and intermittent involuntary movement or sound.

Resources BOOKS

Haerle, Tracy, ed., and Jim Eisenreich. Children with Tourette Syndrome: A Parent’s Guide. Bethesda, MD: Woodbine House, 1992. Leckman, James, and Donald Cohen. Tourette’s Syndrome: Tics, Obsessions, Compulsions: Development, Psychopathology and Clinical Care. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1999. PERIODICALS

Alsobrook, J.P. II, and D.L. Pauls. “The Genetics of Tourette Syndrome.” Neurologic Clinics 15 (May 1997): 381–393. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

ORGANIZATIONS

National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. 31 Center Drive, MSC 2540, Bldg. 31, Room 8806, Bethesda, MD 20814. (301) 496-5751 or (800) 352-9424. . National Tourette Syndrome Association, Inc. 42-40 Bell Blvd., Bayside, NY 11361-2820. (718) 224-2999. Fax: (718) 279-9596. tourette@ix.netcom.com. Tourette Syndrome Foundation of Canada. 194 Jarvis Street, #206, Toronto, ONT M5B 2B7. Canada (800) 361-3120. tsfc.org@sympatico.ca. . OTHER

“About Tourette Syndrome.” Tourette Help. . “Tourette’s Disorder.” Internet Mental Health. .

Lisa Maria Andres, MS, CGC

Toxic encephalopathy see Delirium

Toxic epidermal necrolysis Definition Toxic epidermal necrolysis is a rare condition that causes large portions of the epidermis, the skin’s outermost layer, to detach from the layers of skin below. A reaction to a medication is the primary cause.

Description Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) begins with fever, cough, and other nonspecific symptoms, and is soon followed by purplish, bloody-looking lesions on the skin and mucous membranes. These early lesions, typically found on the head, neck, and upper chest, soon merge and blister. Sheets of epidermis then begin to GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

detach from the skin layers below. In time, the entire surface of the skin may be involved, with detachment of 100% of the epidermis.

Causes and symptoms The main cause of TEN is a severe drug reaction. Some investigators believe there may be additional infectious causes. A severe reaction in transplant patients, called graft-vs.-host disease, can also produce TEN. One study reported more than 100 different drugs as causes of TEN. The drugs most commonly implicated, however, include antibacterial sulfonamides such as sulfadiazine, antibiotics such as aminopenicillins and cephalosporins, and anticonvulsants like phenytoin. TEN is extremely rare. Researchers estimate that there are 0.2 cases per million users of aminopenicillins and 4.5 cases per million users of sulfonamides. Exactly what leads to detachment of the epidermis remains unclear. People with TEN seem to have difficulty metabolizing the offending drug. Some researchers suggest that certain substances that should be cleared from the body instead get deposited on the outer shell of the epidermis, causing an immune response that leads the body to “reject” the skin.

Diagnosis Diagnosis is made primarily on the appearance and spread of the skin lesions, and on a history that includes introduction of a new medication within the previous one to three weeks. A biopsy of the early lesions will confirm the diagnosis. Physicians will consider other potential diseases that cause similar symptoms before reaching a diagnosis of TEN. One is erythema multiforme, a recurrent skin disorder that produces lesions similar in appearance to TEN. However, this disorder is not caused by a drug reaction and does not lead to sheet-like shedding of the skin. Another disease, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, is a druginduced skin disease that some experts believe is really a milder form of TEN. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS) also looks like TEN, but it is caused by a staphylococcal infection. Unlike TEN, which occurs rarely in children, SSSS primarily affects infants, young children, and adults with weakened immune systems.

Treatment There is no specific treatment for TEN. Patients are typically treated in an intensive care unit or in a burn unit and receive treatment similar to that given to patients with major burns. With the loss of skin, severe dehydration is a major risk, so health care workers will attempt to replace fluids intravenously. Nutritional supplementa3345

Toxic epidermal necrolysis

Chappell, P.B., L.D. Scahill, and J.F. Leckman. “Future Therapies of Tourette Syndrome.” Neurologic Clinics 15 (May 1997): 429–450. Eidelberg, D., et al. “The Metabolic Anatomy of Tourette’s Syndrome.” Neurology 48 (April 1997): 927–934. Freeman, R.D. “Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in the Presence of Tourette Syndrome.” Neurologic Clinics 15 (May 1997): 411–420. Lichter, D.G., and L.A. Jackson. “Predictors of Clonidine Response in Tourette Syndrome: Implications and Inferences.” Journal of Child Neurology 11 (March 1997): 93–97. Robertson, Mary. “Tourette Syndrome, Associated Conditions and the Complexities of Treatment.” Brain 123 (2000): 425–462.

Toxic shock syndrome

PERIODICALS

KEY TERMS Epidermis—The outermost layer of the skin. Erythema multiforme—A recurrent skin disorder that produces lesions similar in appearance to TEN, but is not caused by a drug reaction and does not lead to sheet-like shedding of the skin. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome—A disease caused by Staphylococcus aureus, in which large sheets of skin may peel away from the body. It most often affects infants, young children, and people with weakened immune systems. Stevens-Johnson syndrome—A drug-induced skin disease that some experts believe is really a milder form of TEN.

Revuz, Jean E., and Jean Claude Roujeau. “Advances in Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.” Seminars in Cutaneous Medicine and Surgery 15 (Dec. 1996): 258-266. Weightman, Warren. “Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis.” Australasian Journal of Dermatology 37 (Nov. 1996): 167177. ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Dermatology. 930 N. Meacham Road, P.O. Box 4014, Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014. (847) 3300230. .

Richard H. Camer

Toxic shock syndrome Definition

tion from a tube routed through the nose to the stomach may also be contemplated to promote the healing of the skin. Infection is a major risk, so some physicians “paint” the open lesions with topical antiseptics. Others use skin grafts taken from cadavers or cultured skin substitutes to cover large open areas until healing can occur. Some investigators believe systemic corticosteroids are useful in the treatment of TEN. But since these medications have also been implicated as a cause in some cases of TEN and are known to suppress the immune system, their use should be considered carefully.

Prognosis About 25–30% of patients with TEN die. Elderly patients, those with extensive skin lesions, and those with AIDS have the worst prognosis. Widespread systemic infection (sepsis) is the primary cause of death. Survivors, however, will be completely healed in three to four weeks.

Prevention There is no prevention for TEN. No reliable test can indicate that a specific drug may cause TEN in a specific patient. Some researchers believe skin tests of potentially offending drugs may prove useful in the future. Resources BOOKS

Fitzpatrick, Thomas B., et al. Color Atlas and Synopsis of Clinical Dermatology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. Helm, Klaus F., and James G. Marks Jr. Atlas of Differential Diagnosis in Dermatology. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1996. 3346

Toxic shock syndrome (TSS) is an uncommon, but potentially serious, illness that occurs when poisonous substances (toxins) produced by certain bacteria enter the bloodstream. The toxins cause a type of blood poisoning caused by staphylococcal, or less commonly streptococcal, infections in the lungs, throat, skin or bone, or from injuries. Women using super-absorbent tampons during menstruation were found to be most likely to get toxic shock syndrome.

Description TSS first came to the attention of the public in the 1970s. Shortly after the introduction of a super-absorbent tampon, young women across the United States experienced an epidemic of serious but unexplained symptoms. Thousands went to emergency rooms with high fever, vomiting, peeling skin, low blood pressure, diarrhea, and a rash resembling sunburn. The only thing they had in common was that they all were menstruating at the time they felt sick, and all were using tampons—especially super absorbent products. At its height, the epidemic affected 15,000 people in the United States each year between 1980 and 1984; 15% of the women died. Since the offending products were taken off the market, the numbers of TSS cases have declined sharply. As of 1998, only about 5,000 cases are diagnosed annually in the United States, 5% of which are fatal. The decline is most likely due to the tampon manufacturers’ discontinuing the use of some synthetic materials, and the removal from the market of the brand of tampon associated with most cases of TSS. Today, most of these products are made with rayon and cotton. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Most cases reported in the recent past, however, still involve menstruating women under age 30. TSS still occurs in about 17 out of every 100,000 menstruating girls and women each year; more than half of these cases are related to tampons. Between five and 10% of patients with TSS die. Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (STSS) A new type of toxic shock syndrome is caused by a different bacteria, called Group A streptococcus. This form of TSS is called streptococcal toxic shock syndrome, or STSS. Officially recognized in 1987, STSS is related to the strain of streptococcus nicknamed the “flesh-eating bacterium.” STSS affects only one or two out of every 100,000 Americans. It almost never follows a simple “strep throat” infection.

Causes and symptoms Transmission TSS is caused by a strain of Staphylococcus aureus found in the nose, mouth, and occasionally the vagina. The bacteria produce a characteristic toxin. In large enough quantities, the toxin can enter the bloodstream, causing a potentially fatal infection. While experts know the name of the bacterium, more than 10 years after the 1980s epidemic scientists still do not fully understand the link between TSS and tampons. Most medical researchers today suspect that the absorbent tampons introduce oxygen into the vagina, which is normally an oxygen-free area of the body. Oxygen triggers bacterial growth, and the more absorbent the tampon, the more bacteria it can harbor. Some experts believe that the reason TSS is linked to tampons in particular is that bacteria can contaminate and multiply in a tampon. If left in place for a long time—as a woman could do with a super-absorbent product—the bacteria have a better chance of multiplying and producing a large amount of toxin. It is also possible that the tampons or the chemicals they contain may irritate the vaginal lining, enabling the toxin to enter the bloodstream. These types of bacteria are normally present either on hands or in the vagina, and it takes an amount of bacteria only the size of a grain of sand to start an infection. Of the 15% of women who carry Staphylococcus GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

aureus, only about 5% have the strain that produces the TSS toxin. Symptoms TSS. TSS begins suddenly, with a high fever of 102°F (38.9°C) or above, vomiting and watery diarrhea, headache, and sunburn-like rash; together with a sore throat and body aches. Blood pressure may plummet a day or two after the first symptoms appear. When the blood pressure drops, a woman may become disoriented or go into shock. Her kidneys may fail. After these developments, the skin on her hands and feet may peel. STSS. STSS can occur after a streptococcal infection in the body, usually from an infected wound or even chickenpox. Within 48 hours, the patient’s blood pressure drops. There is also fever, dizziness, breathing problems, and a weak, rapid pulse. The area around the wound may swell, the liver and kidneys can fail, and bleeding problems may occur.

Diagnosis Any woman who is wearing a tampon and begins to experience the symptoms of toxic shock syndrome should remove the tampon right away and seek medical care. The doctor will probably examine the vagina for signs of inflammation and rule out common sexually transmitted diseases with similar symptoms. A variety of blood tests, tests of vaginal secretions, and a physical examination are needed to identify this condition.

Treatment TSS In a menstruating woman, the vagina is first cleansed with an antiseptic solution to eliminate some of the bacteria that produce the toxin. TSS is treated with antibiotics, together with other drugs and fluids to lower fever and control blood pressure. STSS Antibiotics are used to treat STSS. Surgery may be needed to remove dead skin and muscle.

Prognosis TSS lasts as long as three weeks, and has a tendency to recur. About a third of the women who are treated for TSS have it again within six months. In addition, TSS can affect the liver, kidneys, lungs, and other organs, depending on the severity of the infection. Untreated toxic shock syndrome can be fatal. 3347

Toxic shock syndrome

In spite of TSS’ association with menstruating women, the disease can affect anyone of either sex or any age or race. The infection may occur in children, men, and non-menstruating women who are weakened from surgery, injury, or disease, and who cannot fight off a staphylococcal infection. New mothers are also at higher risk for TSS.

Toxoplasmosis

KEY TERMS

“Toxic Shock Syndrome—United States.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 46, no. 22 (6 June 1997): 492-495. OTHER

Shock—A condition in which the amount of blood circulating in the body is inadequate to meet the body’s needs. Shock can be caused by certain diseases, serious injury, or blood loss.

Kids Health Page. .

Staphylococcus—A genus of bacteria that is commonly found on human skin and mucous membranes.

Toxocariasis see Roundworm infections Toxoplasma gondii infection see Toxoplasmosis

Streptococcus—A genus of sphere-shaped bacteria that can cause a wide variety of infections.

Carol A. Turkington

Toxin—A poisonous protein that is produced by some bacteria. A toxin is less complex than a poison.

Toxoplasmosis Definition Prevention TSS Women who wear tampons should change them often and use different brands and types of pads and tampons. If a woman really prefers tampons, experts recommend using the lowest possible absorbency product made of cotton and rayon, and wearing it only during the day. In the past, it was difficult to compare absorbency rates for different products. Today, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) requires standardized absorbency measurements on all tampon boxes. Above all, women should wash their hands before inserting a tampon, and change the tampon every four to six hours. Anyone who has had TSS even once should not use tampons again. STSS Doctors still are not sure how people can avoid STSS, but they advise patients to clean and bandage open wounds immediately. Anyone with a red, swollen, or tender wound, or a sudden fever should seek medical care. Resources BOOKS

Garrett, Laurie. The Coming Plague. New York: Penguin Books, 1994. Turkington, Carol A. Infectious Disease A to Z. New York: Facts on File, 1998. PERIODICALS

“CDC defines group A streptococcal toxic shock syndrome.” American Family Physician 47, no. 7 (15 May 1993): 1643-1644. 3348

Toxoplasmosis is an infectious disease caused by the one-celled protozoan parasite Toxoplasma gondii. Although most individuals do not experience any symptoms, the disease can be very serious, and even fatal, in individuals with weakened immune systems.

Description Toxoplasmosis is caused by a one-celled protozoan parasite known as Toxoplasma gondii. Cats, the primary carriers of the organism, become infected by eating rodents and birds infected with the organism. Once ingested, the organism reproduces in the intestines of cats, producing millions of eggs known as oocysts, which are excreted in cat feces daily for approximately two weeks. In the United States, it is estimated that approximately 30% of cats have been infected by T. gondii. Oocysts are not capable of producing infection until approximately 24 hours after being excreted, but they remain infective in water or moist soil for approximately one year. When cattle, sheep, or other livestock forage through areas with contaminated cat feces, these animals become carriers of the disease. Fruits and vegetables can also become contaminated when irrigated with untreated water that has been contaminated with cat feces. In humans and other animals, the organisms produce thickwalled, dormant structures called cysts in the muscle and other tissues of the body. Most humans contract toxoplasmosis by eating cystcontaminated raw or undercooked meat, vegetables, or milk products. Humans can also become infected when they come into contact with the T. gondii eggs while cleaning a cat’s litterbox, gardening, or playing in a sandbox, for instance. Once infected, an individual is immune to reinfection. The incubation period or period between GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Anyone can be infected by T. gondii, but usually only those individuals with weakened immune systems (immunocompromised) develop symptoms of the disease. For them, toxoplasmosis can be severe, debilitating, and fatal. Immunocompromised individuals at risk include those with AIDS, cancer, or other chronic illnesses. There is no person-to-person transmission, except from an infected mother to her child in the womb. Approximately six out of 1,000 women contract toxoplasmosis during pregnancy. Nearly half of these maternal infections are passed on to the fetus. Known as congenital toxoplasmosis, this form of the disease is acquired at birth by approximately 3,300 infants in the United States every year. The risk of fetal infection is estimated to be between one in 1,000 to one in 10,000. In children born with toxoplasmosis, symptoms may be severe and quickly fatal, or may not appear until several months or even years after birth.

Causes and symptoms Healthy individuals do not usually display symptoms. When symptoms do occur, they are usually mild, resembling infectious mononucleosis, and include the following: • enlarged lymph nodes • muscle pains • fever that comes and goes • general sick feeling The distinction is made between acquired toxoplasmosis, in which an individual becomes infected, and neonatal congenital toxoplasmosis, in which a fetus is born with the infection because the mother became infected during pregnancy. If a fetus becomes infected early in pregnancy, the disease can cause the fetus to spontaneously abort, be stillborn. If full-term, the infant may die in infancy or suffer from central nervous system lesions. If the mother becomes infected in the last three months of pregnancy, however, the prognosis is good and the baby may not even display any symptoms. In adults, if the infection continues for an extended period of time, chronic toxoplasmosis can cause an inflammation of the eyes called retinochoroiditis, which can lead to blindness, severe yellowing of the skin and whites of the eyes (jaundice), easy bruising, and convulsions. Adults with weakened immune systems have a high risk of developing cerebral toxoplasmosis, including inflammation of the brain (encephalitis), one-sided weakness or numbness, mood and personality changes, GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

vision disturbances, muscle spasms, and severe headaches. If untreated, cerebral toxoplasmosis can lead to coma and death. This form of encephalitis is the second most common AIDS-related nervous system infection that takes advantage of a person’s weakened immune system (opportunistic infection).

Diagnosis A diagnosis of toxoplasmosis is made based on clinical signs and supporting laboratory results, including visualization of the protozoa in body tissue or isolation in animals and blood tests. Laboratory tests for toxoplasmosis are designed to detect increased amounts of a protein or antibody produced in response to infection with the toxoplasmosis organism. Antibody levels can be elevated for years, however, without active disease.

Treatment Most individuals who contract toxoplasmosis do not require treatment because their immune systems are able to control the disease. Symptoms are not usually present. Mild symptoms may be relieved by taking over-thecounter medications, such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) and ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil). Sore throat lozenges and rest may also ease the symptoms. Although the treatment of women infected with toxoplasmosis during pregnancy is controversial, most physicians feel that treatment is justified. Transmission of toxoplasmosis from the mother to the fetus may be prevented if the mother takes the antibiotic spiramycin. Later in a pregnancy, if the fetus has contracted the disease, treatment with the antibiotic pyrimethamine (Daraprim, Fansidar) or sulfonamides may be effective. Babies born with toxoplasmosis who show symptoms of the disease may be treated with pyrimethamine, the sulfa drug sulfadiazine (Microsulfon), and folinic acid (an active form of folic acid). AIDS patients who have not been infected may be given a drug called TMP/SMX (Bactrim or Septra) to prevent toxoplasmosis infection. To treat cases of toxoplasmosis in immunocompromised AIDS patients, a combination of pyrimethamine and a sulfa-based drug, either sulfadiazine or clindamycin (Cleocin), have been used together and can be effective in treating this disease. Other antibiotic combinations and dosing schedules are still being investigated. Physicians have reported success in alleviating symptoms by using trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Proloprim or Trimpex) or dapsone (DDS) plus pyrimethamine. These drugs can produce side effects, such as allergic reaction, itching, rashes, and nausea; and patients must be monitored closely. 3349

Toxoplasmosis

infection and the start of the disease ranges from several days to months.

Trabeculectomy

Prognosis The prognosis is poor when congenital toxoplasmosis is acquired during the first three months of pregnancy. Afflicted children die in infancy or suffer damage to their central nervous systems that can result in physical and mental retardation. Infection later in pregnancy usually results in only mild symptoms, if any. The prognosis for acquired toxoplasmosis in adults with strong immune systems is excellent. The disease often disappears by itself after several weeks. However, the prognosis for immuniodeficient patients is not as positive. These patients often relapse when treatment is stopped. The disease can be fatal to all immunocompromised patients, especially AIDS patients, and particularly if not treated. As a result, immunocompromised patients are typically placed on anti-toxoplasmosis drugs for the rest of their lives.

Prevention There are no drugs that can eliminate T. gondii cysts in animal or human tissues. Humans can reduce their risks of developing toxoplasmosis by practicing the following: • freezing (to 10.4°F/–12°C) and cooking foods to an internal temperature of 152°F/67°C will kill the cysts • practicing sanitary kitchen techniques, such as washing utensils and cutting boards that come into contact with raw meat • keeping pregnant women and children away from household cats and cat litter

KEY TERMS Cyst—The thick-walled dormant form of many organisms. Immunocompromised—A state in which the immune system is suppressed or not functioning properly. Oocyst—The egg form of the toxoplasmosis organism. Protozoan—A single-celled, usually microscopic, organism.

Campagna, A. C. “Pulmonary Toxoplasmosis.” Seminars in Respiratory Infections 12 (June 1997): 98-105. Rose, I. “Morphology and Diagnostics of Human Toxoplasmosis.” General & Diagnostic Pathology 142 (June 1997): 257-70.

Maury M. Breecher, PhD

Toxoplasmosis, Other, Rubella, Cytomegalovirus, Herpes simplex test see TORCH test T-PA see Thrombolytic therapy

• disposing of cat feces daily, because the oocysts do not become infective until after 24 hours • helping cats to remain free of infection by feeding them dry, canned, or boiled food and by discouraging hunting and scavenging • washing hands after outdoor activities involving soil contact and wearing gloves when gardening Resources BOOKS

Conn’s Current Therapy, 1996. Ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. Shulman, Stanford T., et al. The Biologic and Clinical Basis of Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1998. 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. PERIODICALS

Alger, L. S. “Toxoplasmosis and Parvovirus B19.” Infectious Disease Clinics of North America 11 (Mar. 1997): 55-75. 3350

Trabeculectomy Definition Trabeculectomy is a surgical procedure that removes part of the trabeculum in the eye to relieve pressure caused by glaucoma.

Purpose Glaucoma is a disease that injures the optic nerve, causing progressive loss of vision. Presently, glaucoma is a major cause of blindness in the United States If caught early, glaucoma-related blindness is easily prevented, However, since it does not produce symptoms until late in its cycle, periodic tests for the disease are necessary. Glaucoma is usually associated with an increase in the pressure inside the eye. This increase occurs in front of the iris in a fluid called the aqueous humor. Aqueous humor is supposed to exit through tiny channels between the iris and the cornea, in an area called the trabeculum. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Cornea—Transparent film that covers the iris and pupil. Iris—Colored part of the eye, which is suspended in aqueous humor and perforated by the pupil.

Risks Infection and bleeding are risks of any surgery. Scarring can cause the drainage to stop. A third of patients with trabeculectomies will develop cataracts.

Sclera—White, outer coating of the eyeball. Trabeculoplasty—Laser surgery that creates perforations in the trabeculum, to drain built up aqueous humor and relieve pressure. Trabeculum—Tissue that is a drainage point for aqueous humor in the eye.

Resources BOOKS

General Ophthalmology. 13th ed. Ed. Daniel Vaughan. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1993. Sardegna, Jill, and T. Paul Otis. The Encyclopedia of Blindness and Vision Impairment. New York: Facts on File, Inc., 1990.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD When the trabeculum is blocked, pressure from the build up of aqueous humor either increases rapidly with considerable pain and redness, or, as in most cases, the pressure builds slowly with no symptoms until much of the vision is lost. Trabeculectomy is the last treatment employed for either type of glaucoma. It is used only after medications and laser trabeculoplasty (less invasive procedure that uses a laser to open the blocked trabeculum) have failed to alleviate the pressure.

Description A trabeculectomy involves removing a tiny piece of the eyeball right at the place where the cornea connects to the sclera (the white part), and creating a flap to allow fluid to escape the anterior chamber without deflating the eye. Along with that tiny piece of cornea and sclera comes a piece of the iris. The whole area is called the trabeculum. Fluid can then flow out onto the surface of the eye and be absorbed by the conjunctiva, the transparent membrane that lines the sclera and the eyelids. Sometimes, an additional piece is taken out of the iris so that anterior chamber fluid can also flow backward into the vitreous part of the eye. This procedure is called an iridectomy.

Preparation The procedure and its benefits and possible complications are fully explained. Antiglaucoma drugs are prescribed before surgery. Added pressure on the eye caused from coughing or sneezing should be avoided.

Aftercare Eye drops, and perhaps patching, will be needed until the eye is healed. The pressure inside the eye will GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tracheoesophageal fistula Definition Tracheoesophageal fistula (TEF) is commonly a birth defect, with the trachea connected to the esophagus. In most cases, the esophagus is discontinuous, causing immediate feeding difficulties. TEFs may develop in adult life, secondary to the invasion of cancer in the area. In addition, TEFs may be deliberately constructed with surgery to aid talking in a patient who has the larynx removed (a laryngectomy).

Description The trachea, or windpipe, carries air to the lungs. The esophagus carries food to the stomach. Sometimes during development, these two tubes do not separate completely, but remain connected by a short passage. When this happens, air enters the gastrointestinal system, causing the bowels to distend, and mucus is breathed into the lungs causing aspiration pneumonia and breathing problems. Most tracheoesophageal fistulas are diagnosed when a child is born. There are three types. In 85–90% of tracheoesophageal fistulas, the top part of the esophagus ends in a blind sac, and the lower part inserts into the trachea. In the second type, the upper part of the esophagus is connected directly to the trachea, while the lower part ends in a pouch. In a rare type of fistula called an H type, both the esophagus and trachea are complete, but they are connected. This is the most difficult type of tracheoesophageal fistula to diagnose, because both eating and breathing are possible. 3351

Tracheoesophageal fistula

KEY TERMS

still be monitored. Immediately following the procedure, the patient may experience blurred vision.

Tracheotomy

Causes and symptoms Tracheoesophageal fistulas arise as a developmental abnormality. At birth, the infant has difficulty swallowing. Eating produces severe coughing spells that interfere with breathing. Aspiration pneumonia can develop from fluid breathed into the lungs. Small H type fistulas may go undiagnosed until later in life. Symptoms of an H type fistula include frequent pulmonary infections and bouts of abdominal bloating.

KEY TERMS Endoscopy—A procedure in which an instrument containing a camera and a light source is inserted into the gastrointestinal tract so that the physician can visually inspect the gastrointestinal system. Gastrostomy tube—Stomach tube for feeding. Laryngectomy—Surgical removal of the larynx to treat cancer.

Diagnosis Diagnosis that the esophagus is interrupted is confirmed by the inability to insert a nasogastric suction tube into the stomach. The exact type and location of the fistula can be determined using a radiopaque catheter, which allows pictures to be taken of the esophagus. X rays may show air in the bowels. Endoscopy often fails to located the fistula if it is small.

Treatment Babies with all but H type fistulas are unlikely to survive without surgical separation and repair of the trachea and the esophagus. Surgery cannot always be performed immediately because of prematurity, the presence of other birth defects, or complications from aspiration pneumonia. It is usually done at a hospital that has special facilities for treating seriously ill newborns. While awaiting surgery, the infant’s condition is stabilized. Preoperative care concentrates on avoiding aspiration pneumonia and includes:

may also have problems with gastroesophageal reflux, in which the acidic contents of the stomach back up into the bottom of the esophagus and cause ulcers and scarring.

Prevention Tracheoesophageal fistulas are not preventable birth defects. Resources BOOKS

“Gastrointestinal Defects.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992.

Tish Davidson

Tracheostomy see Tracheotomy

• elevating the head to avoid reflux and aspiration of the stomach contents • using a suction catheter to continuously removed mucus and saliva that could be inhaled • when necessary, placement of a gastrostomy tube • withholding feeding by mouth When surgery is performed, the esophagus is reconnected to make it continuous and separate from the trachea. If the two ends of the esophagus are too far apart to be reattached, a piece of tissue from the large intestine is used to join the parts.

Prognosis Infants who have tracheoesophageal fistula often have other birth defects that affect their recovery. Even when the esophagus is successfully separated and reattached, many infants have difficulty swallowing, because the contractility of the esophagus is impaired. Infants 3352

Tracheotomy Definition A tracheotomy is a surgical procedure in which a cut or opening is made in the windpipe (trachea). The surgeon inserts a tube into the opening to bypass an obstruction, allow air to get to the lungs, or remove secretions. The term tracheostomy is sometimes used interchangeably with tracheotomy. Strictly speaking, however, tracheostomy usually refers to the opening itself while a tracheotomy is the actual operation.

Purpose A tracheotomy is performed if enough air is not getting to the lungs, if the person cannot breathe without help, or is having problems with mucus and other secretions getGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tracheotomy

Thyroid isthmus

Retractor Figure A

Figure B

Figure C

Larynx Thyroid isthmus

Subcutaneous tissues

Trachea

Muscle Sutures Thyroid Treacheotomy tube inserted Figure D

Figure E

Figure F

Tracheotomy is a surgical procedure in which an opening is made in the windpipe or trachea. As shown in the illustration above, the physician or surgeon will follow these steps in performing this procedure: Figure A: A vertical incision is made through the skin. Figure B: Another incision is made through the subcutaneous tissues and muscles of the neck. Figure C: The neck muscles are separated using retractors. Figure D: The thyroid isthmus is either cut or retracted. Figure E: The surgeon identifies the rings of cartilage that make up the trachea and cuts into the walls. Figure F: A metal or plastic tube is inserted into the opening and sutures are used to hold the tube in place. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

ting into the windpipe because of difficulty swallowing. There are many reasons why air cannot get to the lungs. The patient’s windpipe may be blocked by a swelling; by a severe injury to the neck, nose or mouth; by a large foreign object; by paralysis of the throat muscles; or by a tumor. The patient may be in a coma, or need a ventilator to pump air into the lungs for a long period of time.

Precautions Doctors perform emergency tracheotomies as lastresort procedures. They are done only if the patient’s windpipe is obstructed and the situation is life-threatening.

Description Emergency tracheotomy There are two different procedures that are called tracheotomies. The first is done only in emergency situations GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

and can be performed quite rapidly. The emergency room physician or surgeon makes a cut in a thin part of the voice box (larynx) called the cricothyroid membrane. A tube is inserted and connected to an oxygen bag. This emergency procedure is sometimes called a cricothyroidotomy. Nonemergency tracheotomy The second type of tracheotomy takes more time and is usually done in an operating room. The surgeon first makes a cut (incision) in the skin of the neck that lies over the trachea. This incision is in the lower part of the neck between the Adam’s apple and top of the breastbone. The neck muscles are separated and the thyroid gland, which overlies the trachea, is usually cut down the middle. The surgeon identifies the rings of cartilage that make up the trachea and cuts into the tough walls. A metal or plastic tube, called a tracheotomy tube, is inserted through the opening. This tube acts like a windpipe and allows the 3353

Tracheotomy

person to breathe. Oxygen or a mechanical ventilator may be hooked up to the tube to bring oxygen to the lungs. A dressing is placed around the opening. Tape or stitches (sutures) are used to hold the tube in place.

the hole stays open and, if it is no longer needed, it will be surgically closed.

After a nonemergency tracheotomy, the patient usually stays in the hospital for three to five days, unless there is a complicating condition. It takes about two weeks to recover fully from the surgery.

After the patient is discharged, he or she will need help at home to manage the tracheotomy tube. Warm compresses can be used to relieve pain at the incision site. The patient is advised to keep the area dry. It is recommended that the patient wear a loose scarf over the opening when going outside. He or she should also avoid contact with water, food particles, and powdery substances that could enter the opening and cause serious breathing problems. The doctor may prescribe pain medication and antibiotics to minimize the risk of infections. If the tube is to be kept in place permanently, the patient can be referred to a speech therapist in order to learn to speak with the tube in place. The tracheotomy tube may be replaced four to 10 days after surgery.

Preparation Emergency tracheotomy In the emergency tracheotomy, there is no time to explain the procedure or the need for it to the patient. The patient is placed on his or her back with face upward (supine), with a rolled-up towel between the shoulders. This positioning of the patient makes it easier for the doctor to feel and see the structures in the throat. A local anesthetic is injected across the cricothyroid membrane. Nonemergency tracheotomy In a nonemergency tracheotomy, there is time for the doctor to discuss the surgery with the patient, to explain what will happen and why it is needed. The patient is then put under general anesthesia. The neck area and chest are then disinfected as preparation for the operation, and surgical drapes are placed over the area, setting up a sterile field.

Aftercare Postoperative care A chest x ray is often taken, especially in children, to check whether the tube has become displaced or if complications have occurred. The doctor may prescribe antibiotics to reduce the risk of infection. If the patient can breathe on their own, the room is humidified; otherwise, if the tracheotomy tube is to remain in place, the air entering the tube from a ventilator is humidified. During the hospital stay, the patient and his or her family members will learn how to care for the tracheotomy tube, including suctioning and clearing it. Secretions are removed by passing a smaller tube (catheter) into the tracheotomy tube. It takes most patients several days to adjust to breathing through the tracheotomy tube. At first, it will be hard even to make sounds. If the tube allows some air to escape and pass over the vocal cords, then the patient may be able to speak by holding a finger over the tube. A patient on a ventilator will not be able to talk at all. The tube will be removed if the tracheotomy is temporary. Then the wound will heal quickly and only a small scar may remain. If the tracheotomy is permanent, 3354

Home care

Patients are encouraged to go about most of their normal activities once they leave the hospital. Vigorous activity is restricted for about six weeks. If the tracheotomy is permanent, further surgery may be needed to widen the opening, which narrows with time.

Risks Immediate risks There are several short-term risks associated with tracheotomies. Severe bleeding is one possible complication. The voice box or esophagus may be damaged during surgery. Air may become trapped in the surrounding tissues or the lung may collapse. The tracheotomy tube can be blocked by blood clots, mucus, or the pressure of the airway walls. Blockages can be prevented by suctioning, humidifying the air, and selecting the appropriate tracheotomy tube. Serious infections are rare. Long-term risks Over time, other complications may develop following a tracheotomy. The windpipe itself may become damaged for a number of reasons, including pressure from the tube; bacteria that cause infections and form scar tissue; or friction from a tube that moves too much. Sometimes the opening does not close on its own after the tube is removed. This risk is higher in tracheotomies with tubes remaining in place for 16 weeks or longer. In these cases, the wound is surgically closed. High-risk groups The risks associated with tracheotomies are higher in the following groups of patients: GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Cartilage—A tough, fibrous connective tissue that forms various parts of the body, including the trachea and larynx. Cricothyroidotomy—An emergency tracheotomy that consists of a cut through the cricothyroid membrane to open the patient’s airway as fast as possible.

“Answers to Common Otolaryngology Health Care Questions.” Department of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery Page. University of Washington School of Medicine. . Sicard, Michael W. “Complications of Tracheotomy.” The Bobby R. Alford Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Communicative Sciences. .

Jeanine Barone, Physiologist

Larynx—A structure made of cartilage and muscle that connects the back of the throat with the trachea. The larynx contains the vocal cords. Trachea—The tube that leads from the larynx or voice box to two major air passages that bring oxygen to each lung. The trachea is sometimes called the windpipe. Ventilator—A machine that helps patients to breathe. It is sometimes called a respirator.

• children, especially newborns and infants

Trachoma Definition Trachoma, which is also called granular conjunctivitis or Egyptian ophthalmia, is a contagious, chronic inflammation of the mucous membranes of the eyes, caused by Chlamydia trachomatis. It is characterized by swelling of the eyelids, sensitivity to light, and eventual scarring of the conjunctivae and corneas of the eyes.

• smokers • alcoholics • obese adults • persons over 60 • persons with chronic diseases or respiratory infections • persons taking muscle relaxants, sleeping medications, tranquilizers, or cortisone The overall risk of death from a tracheotomy is less than 5%.

Normal results Normal results include uncomplicated healing of the incision and successful maintenance of long-term tube placement. Resources BOOKS

Fagan, Johannes J., et al. Tracheotomy. Alexandria, VA: American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Foundation, Inc., 1997. “Neck Surgery.” In The Surgery Book: An Illustrated Guide to 73 of the Most Common Operations, ed. Robert M. Younson, et al. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1993. Schantz, Nancy V. “Emergency Cricothyroidotomy and Tracheostomy.” In Procedures for the Primary Care Physician, ed. John Pfenninger and Grant Fowler. New York: Mosby, 1994. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Description Trachoma is a major cause of blindness in the world. It is found in the Far East, as well as countries with desert climates. In the United States, it is most common among certain Native Americans and in parts of Appalachia. The infection is highly contagious in its early stages. Blindness results from recurrent untreated infections. The conjunctiva is the clear mucous membrane that lines the inside of the eyelid and covers the white part (sclera) of the eye. Conjunctivitis is an inflammation of the conjunctiva.

Causes and symptoms Trachoma is caused by C. trachomatis, a parasitic organism closely related to bacteria. It is transmitted by insects, by hand-to-eye contact, or by the sharing of infected handkerchiefs or towels. The incubation period is about a week. The early symptoms of trachoma include the development of follicles (small sacs) on the conjunctivae of the upper eyelids, pain, swollen eyelids, a discharge, tearing, and sensitivity to light. If the infection is not treated, the follicles develop into large yellow or gray pimples, and small blood vessels develop inside the cornea. In most cases, both eyes are infected. 3355

Trachoma

OTHER

Trachoma

KEY TERMS Conjunctivitis—Inflammation of the conjunctivae, which are the mucous membranes covering the white part of the eyeball (sclera) and lining the inside of the eyelids. Cornea—The transparent front part of the eye that allows light to enter. Ophthalmia—Inflammation of the eye. Usually severe and affecting the conjunctiva. Trachoma is sometimes called Egyptian ophthalmia. A close-up of a human eye with trachoma. Trachoma is caused by Chlamydia trachomatis and commonly results in blindness if left untreated. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

Repeated infections eventually lead to contraction and turning-in of the eyelids, scarring of the corneas and conjunctivae, eventual blockage of the tear ducts, and blindness.

Diagnosis Diagnosis is based on a combination of the patient’s history (especially living or traveling in areas with high rates of trachoma) and examination of the eyes. The doctor will look for the presence of follicles or scarring. He or she will take a small sample of cells from the patient’s conjunctivae and examine them, following a procedure called Giemsa staining, to confirm the diagnosis.

Treatment Treatment of early-stage trachoma consists of four to six weeks of antibiotic treatment with tetracycline, erythromycin, or sulfonamides. Antibiotics should be given without waiting for laboratory test results. Treatment may combine oral medication with antibiotic ointment applied directly to the eyes. A single-dose treatment with azithromycin is an alternative method. Tetracyclines should not be given to pregnant women or children below the age of seven years. Patients with complications from untreated or repeated infections are treated surgically. Surgery can be used for corneal transplantation or to correct eyelid deformities.

Prognosis The prognosis for full recovery is excellent if the patient is treated promptly. If the infection has progressed to the stage of follicle development, prevention 3356

of blindness depends on the severity of the follicles, the presence of additional bacterial infections, and the development of scarring.

Prevention There are vaccines available that offer temporary protection against trachoma, but there is no permanent immunization. Prevention depends upon good hygiene and public health measures: • seek treatment immediately if a child shows signs of eye infection, and minimize his or her contact with other children • teach children to wash hands carefully before touching their eyes • protect children from flies or gnats that settle around the eyes • if someone has trachoma (or any eye infection), do not share towels, pillowcases, etc.; wash items well • if medications are prescribed, follow the doctor’s instructions carefully Resources BOOKS

O’Brien, Terrence P. “Conjunctivitis.” In Conn’s Current Therapy, 1996, ed. Robert E. Rakel. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. “Ophthalmologic Disorders: Trachoma.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. Riordan-Eva, Paul, et al. “Eye.” In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1998. 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. “Trachoma.” In Professional Guide to Diseases, ed. Stanley Loeb, et al. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1991.

Rebecca J. Frey, PhD GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Definition Traction is the use of a pulling force to treat muscle and skeleton disorders.

Purpose Traction is usually applied to the arms and legs, the neck, the backbone, or the pelvis. It is used to treat fractures, dislocations, and long-duration muscle spasms, and to prevent or correct deformities. Traction can either be short-term, as at an accident scene, or long-term, when it is used in a hospital setting. Traction serves several purposes: • it aligns the ends of a fracture by pulling the limb into a straight position • it ends muscle spasm • it relieves pain • it takes the pressure off the bone ends by relaxing the muscle There are two main types of traction: skin traction and skeletal traction. Within these types, many specialized forms of traction have been developed to address problems in particular parts of the body. The application of traction is an exacting technique that requires training and experience, since incorrectly applied traction can cause harm. Positioning the extremity so that the angle of pull brings the ends of the fracture together is essential. Elaborate methods of weights, counterweights, and pulleys have been developed to provide the appropriate force while keeping the bones aligned and preventing muscle spasm. The patient’s age, weight, and medical condition are all taken into account when deciding on the type and degree of traction.

Precautions People who are suffering from skin disorders or who are allergic to tape should not undergo skin traction, because the application of traction will aggravate their condition. Likewise, circulatory disorders or varicose veins can be aggravated by skin traction. People with an inflammation of the bone (osteomyelitis) should not undergo skeletal traction.

Description Skin traction Skin traction uses five- to seven-pound weights attached to the skin to indirectly apply the necessary GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Weights are attached either through adhesive or nonadhesive tape, or with straps, boots, or cuffs. Care must be taken to keep the straps or tape loose enough to prevent swelling and allow good circulation to the part of the limb beyond the spot where the traction is applied. The amount of weight that can be applied through skin traction is limited because excessive weight will irritate the skin and cause it to slough off. Specialized forms of skin traction have been developed to address specific problems. Dunlop’s traction is used on children with certain fractures of the upper arm, when the arm must be kept in a flexed position to prevent problems with the circulation and nerves around the elbow. Pelvic traction is applied to the lower spine, with a belt around the waist. Buck’s skin traction is used to treat knee injuries other than fractures. The purpose of this traction is to stabilize the knee and reduce muscle spasm. Skeletal traction Skeletal traction is performed when more pulling force is needed than can be withstood by skin traction; or when the part of the body needing traction is positioned so that skin traction is impossible. Skeletal traction uses weights of 25-40 pounds. Skeletal traction requires the placement of tongs, pins, or screws into the bone so that the weight is applied directly to the bone. This is an invasive procedure that is done in an operating room under general, regional, or local anesthesia. Correct placement of the pins is essential to the success of the traction. The pin can be kept in place several months, and must be kept clean to prevent infection. Once the hardware is in place, pulleys and weights are attached to wires to provide the proper pull and alignment on the affected part. Specialized forms of skeletal traction include cervical traction used for fractures of the neck vertebrae; overhead arm traction used for certain types of upper arm fractures; and tibia pin traction used for some fractures of the femur, hip, or pelvis.

Preparation X rays are done prior to the application of both forms of traction, and may be repeated during treatment to assure that the affected parts are staying in alignment 3357

Traction

Traction

pulling force on the bone. If traction is temporary, or if only a light or discontinuous force is needed, then skin traction is the preferred treatment. Because the procedure is not invasive, it is usually performed in a hospital bed.

Traction

Simple traction

Hamilton Russell traction

Gallows traction

Balanced skeletal traction

Traction refers to the usage of a pulling force and special devices, such as a cast or splint, to treat muscle and skeletal disorders. It is used to treat fractures, dislocations, and long-duration muscle spasms, and to prevent or correct deformities. The illustration above features several commonly used forms of traction. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

and healing properly. Since the insertion of the anchoring devices in skeletal traction is a surgical procedure, standard preoperative blood and urine testing are done, and the patient may meet with an anesthesiologist to discuss any health conditions that might affect the administration of anesthesia.

Aftercare Aftercare for skin traction involves making sure the limb stays aligned, and caring for the skin so that it does not become sore and irritated. The patient should also be alert to any swelling or tingling in the limb that would suggest that the limb has been wrapped too tightly. Aftercare for skeletal traction is more complex. The patient is likely to be immobile for an extended period. Deep breathing exercises are taught so that respiratory function is maintained during this time of little activity. Patients are also encouraged to do range-of motion exercises with the unaffected parts of the body. The patient is taught how to use a trapeze (an overhead support bar) to shift on and off a bedpan, since it is not possible to get up to use the toilet. In serious injuries, 3358

traction may be continued for several months until healing is complete.

Risks The main risks associated with skin traction are that the traction will be applied incorrectly and cause harm, or that the skin will become irritated. There are more risks associated with skeletal traction. Bone inflammation may occur in response to the introduction of foreign material into the body. Infection can occur at the pin sites. If caught early, infection can be treated with antibiotics, but if severe, it may require removal of the pin. Both types of traction have complications associated with long periods of immobility. These include the development of bed sores, reduced respiratory function, urinary problems, and circulatory problems. Occasionally, fractures fail to heal. Being confined to traction for a long period can take a an emotional toll on the patient, also.

Normal results When correctly applied, traction generally produces very good, if slow, results. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Traditional Chinese medicine

Resources BOOKS

Rodrigo, Juan J. “Traction.” In Orthopaedic Surgery: Basic Science and Clinical Science. Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1986. “Traction.” In Everything You Need to Know About Medical Treatments. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corp., 1996.

Tish Davidson

Traditional Chinese medicine Definition Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is an ancient and still very vital holistic system of health and healing, based on the notion of harmony and balance, and employing the ideas of moderation and prevention.

Purpose TCM is a complete system of health-care with its own unique theories of anatomy, health, and treatment. It emphasizes diet and prevention and using acupuncture, herbal medicine, massage, and exercise; and focuses on stimulating the body’s natural curative powers.

Precautions In situations of severe trauma, TCM should not be substituted for contemporary modern trauma practice; it is most useful as an adjunct to the healing regimen. TCM is not the first line of treatment for bacterial infection or cancer, but may usefully complement contemporary medical treatment for those conditions.

Description In theory and practice, traditional Chinese medicine is completely different from Western medicine, both in terms of considering how the human body works and how illness occurs and should be treated. As a part of a continuing system that has been in use for thousands of years, it is still employed to treat over one-quarter of the world’s population. Since the earliest Chinese physicians were also philosophers, their ways of viewing the world and human beings’ role in it affected their medicine. In TCM, both philosophically and medically, moderation in all things is advocated, as is living in harmony with nature and striving for balance in all things. Prevention is also a key goal of Chinese medicine, and much emphasis is placed on educating the patient to live responsibly. The GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Chinese medicine practitioner preparing herbal medicines. (Photograph by Eric Nelson. Custom Medical Stock Photo, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

Chinese physician also is more of an advisor than an authority; he or she believes in treating every patient differently, based on the notion that one does not treat the disease or condition but rather the individual patient. Thus two people with the same complaint may be treated entirely differently, if their constitutions and life situations are dissimilar. Disease is also considered to be evidence of the failure of preventive health care and a falling out of balance or harmony. There is some confusion in the West about the fundamental philosophical principles upon which traditional Chinese medicine is based — such as the concept of yin and yang, the notion of five elements (wood, fire, earth, metal and water), and the concept of chi — yet each can be explained in a way that is understandable to Westerners. Yin and yang describe the interdependent relationship of opposing but complementary forces believed to be necessary for a healthy life. Basically, the goal is to maintain a balance of yin and yang in all things. The five elements, or five-phase theory, is also grounded in the notion of harmony and balance. The concept of chi, which means something like “life force” or “energy,” is perhaps most different from Western ideas. TCM asserts that chi is an invisible energy force that flows freely in a healthy person, but is weakened or blocked when a person is ill. Specifically, the illness is a result of the blockage, rather than the blockage being the result of the illness. Besides these philosophical concepts that differ considerably from infection-based principles of medicine and health, the methods employed by traditional Chinese 3359

Traditional Chinese medicine

medicine are also quite different. If allopathic Western practitioners could be described as interventionist and dependent on synthetic pharmaceuticals, TCM methods are mostly natural and noninvasive. For example, where Western physicians might employ surgery and chemotherapy or radiation for a cancer patient, a TCM physician might use acupuncture and dietary changes. TCM believes in “curing the root” of a disease and not merely in treating its symptoms. Another major difference is how the patient is regarded. In Western medicine, patients with similar complaints or diseases, usually will receive virtually the same treatment. In TCM however, the physician treats the patient and not the condition, believing that identical diseases can have entirely different causes. In terms of the principles upon which it is based and the methods used, traditional Chinese medicine, therefore, is considered by many in the West to be a radically different system of healthcare. To some in the Western world, this very strangeness is the reason why it might be attractive. To others, tired of what they perceive as their physician’s perfunctory, analytical, and sometimes cold manner, TCM offers a more humane, patient-oriented approach that encourages a high degree of practitioner-patient interaction and is not overly dependent on technology. For example, during a consultation with a TCM practitioner, the patient will receive a considerable amount of time and attention. During the important first visit, the practitioner will conduct four types of examinations, all extremely observational and all quite different from what patients usually experience. First, the practitioner will ask many questions, going beyond the typical patient history to inquire about such particulars as eating and bowel habits or sleep patterns. Next, the physician looks at the patient, observing his or her complexion and eyes, while also examining the tongue very closely, believing that it is a barometer of the body’s health and that different areas of the tongue can reflect the functioning of different body organs. After observing, they listen to the patient’s voice or cough and then smell his or her breath, body odor, urine, and even bowel movements. Finally, the practitioner touches the patient, palpating his or her abdomen and feeling the wrist to take up to six different pulses. It is through these different pulses that the well-trained practitioner can diagnose any problem with the flow of the all-important chi. Altogether, this essentially observational examination will lead the physician to diagnose or decide the patient’s problem. This diagnosis is very different from one in contemporary Western medicine. No blood or urine samples are tested in a laboratory. The 3360

key to this technique lies in the experience and skill of the practitioner. After making a diagnosis, the physician will suggest a course of treatment from one or all of the available TCM methods. These fall into four main categories: herbal medicine, acupuncture, dietary therapy, and massage and exercise. A typical TCM prescription consists of a complex variety of many different herbal and mineral ingredients. Chinese herbal remedies are intended to assist the body’s own systems so that eventually the patient can stop taking them and never becomes dependent on them. Herbal formulas are usually given as teas, which differ according to the patient. Other common techniques used in a TCM prescription are as follows: • Acupuncture is based on the notion that the body’s vital energy force, chi, travels through known channels or “meridians.” The acupuncturist inserts tiny, thin sterile needles at particular, selected points on the body to unblock or correct the flow of energy. These needles are hardly felt as they are inserted and are left in place for 15–20 minutes. Some patients report immediate improvement, others feel exhilarated, while some feel like sleeping. In some cases, patients say their condition worsens before it improves. No contemporary scientific explanation exists as to how or why acupuncture works. • Moxibustion is a variation sometimes employed. Moxibustion is the slow burning on or over the body of special herbal “cones.” These are placed on specific acupoints and provide penetrating, relaxing heat. • Massage is often recommended, and a deep finger pressure technique known as acupressure is often used to promote the proper flow of chi. • Diet is considered essential to good health, and what might be called “kitchen medicine” is just another aspect of herbalism. One example is a delicious dong quai black bean soup that is traditionally eaten by women in China after childbirth and each menstrual cycle. • Therapeutic exercises are sometimes prescribed as well. In both the exact and flowing movements of t’ai chi, and the breathing techniques of Qi Dong exercise is considered essential to relieving stress and promoting the smooth flow of chi. As a system of total healthcare, TCM is prepared to deal with any physical or mental problem, condition, or disease. However, unlike Western medicine at its best, TCM is not able to render the kind of emergency crisis intervention that saves lives during physical traumas. Nonetheless, it works best at achieving its goal of practicing preventive medicine. It has proven effective in treating many types of aches and pains and in helping GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

PERIODICALS

Allopathic—Pertaining to conventional medical treatment of disease symptoms that uses substances or techniques to oppose or suppress the symptoms. Anatomy—The science of the body structure of an organism and its parts. Holistic—That which pertains to the entire person, including the mind, body, and spirit. Palpate—To examine the body by touching or pressing with the fingers or the palm of the hand. Pharmaceutical—Pertaining to drugs.

Huston, Peter. “China, Chi, and Chicanery.” Skeptical Inquirer (Sept./Oct. 1995): 38-42, 58. Light, Louise. “Kitchen Medicine for Women.” Vegetarian Times, July 1997, 102-106. Salmons, Catherine A. “Zen and the Art of Healing.” Boston Magazine, Apr. 1997, 62-65, 95. ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Medical Acupuncture. 2520 Milvia St., Berkeley, CA 94704. (415) 841-3220. American Association of Acupuncture & Oriental Medicine. 4101 Lake Boone Trail, Suite 201, Raleigh, NC 27607. (919) 787-5181.

Therapeutic—Curative or healing.

Leonard C. Bruno, PhD

Trauma—Injury or damage to the body.

people with depression and fatigue, as well as circulation and digestive problems. Overall, its emphasis on good diet and exercise, as well as on individual responsibility and moderation in all things, suggest that it is grounded in fundamentally sound principles.

Risks In the hands of a qualified practitioner, TCM is very safe. However, there is a small chance of not only getting an infection from acupuncture, but also that an existing infection could be spread to other parts of the body by increased blood flow and circulation.

Normal results Traditional Chinese medicine seeks to harmonize and rebalance the entire human system rather than to treat just symptoms. Since proper internal balance is considered to be the key to human health, TCM strives to cure disease by restoring that balance and therefore allowing the body to repair itself. Its continuing medical goal is to detect and correct abnormalities before they cause permanent physical damage. Resources BOOKS

Eckert, Achim. Chinese Medicine for Beginners. Rocklin, CA: Prima Publishing, 1996. Reid, Daniel. The Shambhala Guide to Traditional Chinese Medicine. Boston: Shambhala Publications, Inc., 1996. Williams, Tom. Chinese Medicine. Rockport, MA: Element Books Ltd., 1995. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Trager psychophysical integration Definition Trager psychophysical integration therapy, also known as the Tragerwork system of physical integration, is a combination of hands-on tissue mobilization, relaxation, and movement reeducation called Mentastics. The underlying principle of psychophysical integration is that clients learn to be lighter, easier, and freer by experiencing lightness, ease, and freedom of movement in their bodies. The Trager method is a psychologically grounded physical approach to muscle relaxation, which is induced when a practitioner and patient achieve a state of mind called hook-up. Hook-up is described as a connection to a state of grace or a powerful and nourishing life force. It is the opposite of strain or effort.

Purpose Psychophysical integration therapy has been helpful in relieving muscle discomfort in patients afflicted with polio, muscular dystrophy, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, post-stroke trauma, and psychiatric disturbances. The therapy is useful in alleviating such chronic conditions as back and leg pain. Athletes may benefit from this system to increase resilience to injuries and to improve their mental attitudes. In addition, the Trager Institute maintains that Tragerwork helps clients achieve greater mental clarity through the release of “deep-seated physical and mental patterns.” 3361

Trager psychophysical integration

KEY TERMS

Ziyin, Shen, and Chen Zelin. The Basis of Traditional Chinese Medicine. Boston: Shambhala Publications, Inc., 1994.

Trager psychophysical integration

M I LTO N T R AG E R ( 1 9 0 9 – 1 9 9 7 ) Milton Trager was a medical doctor and a somatic educator, specializing in body learning. He was a contemporary of F. Matthias Alexander, Moshe Feldenkrais, and Ida Rolf. As a young man in the 1920s, he occupied himself with gymnastics and boxing. Through his intensely physical pursuits, he arrived at his self-taught body learning theories. The techniques that he nurtured emphasized body control over strength, prowess, and endurance. For example, in striving to leap as high as possible, Trager focused his concentration on landing as softly as possible. He obtained a degree in physical medicine before serving in the military during World War II. Upon his return, Trager funded his medical school education with his GI benefits. He established a private practice and spent the ensuing 50 years refining his body learning techniques and assisting afflicted individuals in the process. When Trager’s father was stricken with sciatic pain, Trager learned to relieve the spasms by hand. In time he learned to alleviate the symptoms of polio victims and others who suffered from muscle spasms. Trager established the Trager Institute in the 1970s to propagate the techniques that he had developed. By the year 2000, an estimated 2,000 students and practitioners had embraced the Trager Approach. Trager lived with his wife, Emily, in Southern California at the time of his death in January 1997.

Description Origins

be cumulative, practitioners and clients appear to be free to set their own schedules for a series of sessions. There is no minimum number of sessions that clients must agree to take. Tablework The tablework is performed on a comfortable padded table. Sessions last about 60–90 minutes. The practitioner moves the client in ways that he or she naturally moves, in such a way that he or she experiences how it feels to move effortlessly and freely on one’s own. The movements resemble general mobilization techniques, and incorporate some manual, cervical, and lumbar traction. The goal of tablework is to allow the client “slowly to give up muscular and mental control and sink into a very deep state of relaxation not unlike that experienced in hypnosis.” Mentastics Mentastics are free-flowing dance-like movements intended to increase the client’s self-awareness, as well as providing tools to help the client move through and control chronic pain. The client is encouraged to “let go,” which means that they are asked to begin a movement, then release their muscle tension and allow the weight of the body part involved to complete the motion. By experiencing movement as something pleasurable and positive rather than painful or negative, clients begin to loosen up, learn new movements more easily, and even begin inventing their own. In the early stages of treatment, clients are advised to do Mentastic movements at home for 10–15-minute sessions, three times per day.

Preparations

Psychophysical integration therapy began with Dr. Milton Trager (1909–1997), who earned a medical degree in midlife after working out his approach to healing chronic pain. Trager was born with a spinal deformity and overcame it through practicing a variety of athletic exercises. At the time that he discovered his approach to bodywork, he was training to become a boxer. His therapy came to public attention when Esalen Institute in California, the famous center of the human potential movement, invited him to give a demonstration of his technique during the mid1970s. Trager abandoned his private medical practice in 1977 to devote full energy to the development and further understanding of psychophysical integration. The Trager Institute, which continues his work, was founded in 1980.

Prior to a session of tablework, the client dresses for comfort, “with a minimum of swimwear or briefs,” according to the Trager Institute. The client is also covered with a drape. No oils or lotions are used.

The Trager method consists of two parts, a passive aspect referred to as tablework and an active aspect called Mentastics, which is a self-care exercise program. Although the benefits of the Trager approach are said to

Because of the unusual sensitivity and heightened awareness that is associated with the practitioner’s touch, pain should never result from tablework sessions. It is important for clients to alert the practitioner to any pain

3362

The practitioner prepares for the session by clearing his or her mind of everything but the client, until he or she achieves a state of hook-up. This attitude of “relaxed meditative awareness” on the part of the practitioner is one of the unique features of Tragerwork. It is described as allowing the therapist “to connect deeply with the recipient in an unforced way and enables the practitioner to perceive the slightest responses from the [client’s] body.”

Precautions

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Hook-up—A state of effortless connection with a life-enhancing force. Trager practitioners enter a state of hook-up before working with clients in order to focus on their needs. Trager himself described hook-up as a meditative process of “becoming one with the energy force that surrounds all living things.” Mentastics—The active phase of Trager therapy. Mentastics are a form of movement reeducation in which clients learn to reexperience movement as pleasurable and positive. Tablework—The passive phase of Trager therapy, in which the practitioner uses gentle and noninvasive movements to allow the client to relax deeply and experience physical movement as free and effortless.

Florida Institute of Psychophysical Integration: Quantum Balance. 5837 Mariner Drive. Tampa, FL 33609-3411. (813) 186-2273. Fax: (813) 287-2870. Dr.Joy@JohnsonMail.com>. Trager Institute. 21 Locust Avenue. Mill Valley, CA 949412806. (415) 388-2688. Fax: (415) 399-2710. admin@ trager.com. .

Gloria Cooksey

Tranquilizers see Antianxiety drugs

Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography Definition Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography is a noninvasive method of analyzing blood flow in the brain.

associated with either the tablework or the Mentastics program. Although the movements used in Trager tablework are gentle and noninvasive, clients who have had recent injuries or surgery should wait to heal before undertaking a course of Tragerwork.

Side effects The Trager method should not produce physical side effects when employed by a qualified practitioner. It is possible that some clients may have emotional reactions associated with the release of physical patterns acquired as a response to trauma, but such reactions are unusual.

Research and general acceptance Tragerwork, like other forms of bodywork, has gained increasing acceptance as a form of treatment since the 1980s. In 2000 there were 1,200 certified psychophysical integration practitioners in 15 countries worldwide. The therapy has been reported as a commonly employed treatment for mainstream athletes. In addition, the National Institutes of Health lists psychophysical therapy as a mindbody form of complementary alternative medicine. Resources BOOKS

Juhan, Deanne. Job’s Body. Station Hill Press, 1987. Trager, Milton, M.D. Trager Mentastics: Movements as a Way to Agelessness. Station Hill Press, 1987. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Purpose The blood that flows through the brain distributes nutrients to the brain and removes wastes. This flow maintains the high rate of metabolism necessary for the brain to function. Restrictions in blood flow may occur from vessel narrowing (stenosis), clot formation (thrombosis), blockage (embolism), or blood vessel rupture (hemorrhage). Lack of sufficient blood flow (ischemia) threatens brain tissue and may cause a stroke. The flow of blood through the arteries in the brain can be analyzed using transcranial Doppler ultrasonography (TCD). TCD is a form of ultrasound, in which high frequency sound waves bounce off or pass through body tissues. While most other types of ultrasonography create images of the tissue being studied, the results of TCD are audible sounds that the examiner listens to and records. Doppler ultrasonography uses what is called the Doppler effect to measure the rate and direction of blood flow in the vessels. Just as a siren’s pitch sounds higher when its source is moving toward you and lower as it moves away, so too will ultrasound waves change pitch, or frequency, as they bounce off the red blood cells moving in the blood. It is these pitch changes that produce the audible sounds during the exam. Changes in frequency can be used to measure both the direction and the speed of blood flow. Faster blood flow causes a greater change in frequency. Combined with other tests, this information can be used to locate restrictions in the blood vessels in the brain, and to track 3363

Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography

ORGANIZATIONS

Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography

changes in blood flow over time. In this way, TCD gives valuable information about the site of a stroke and the patient’s progress after a stroke. TCD is also used to evaluate the contraction of blood vessels that can occur if a blood vessel ruptures.

Precautions Ultrasonography procedures are safe, noninvasive, and painless. No special precautions are necessary.

Description TCD is done with either one or two probes placed against the skin. The examiner spreads a clear gel on the areas of the head where the probe will be placed. Usually, the probes are placed on the temple, on the base of the skull at the back of the neck, and over the closed eyelid. In these places, there is the least amount of thick protective bone and the sound waves can penetrate the best. The examiner adjusts the probe position and orientation to direct the sound waves toward the blood vessels of interest. Finding the best approach may take some time. A compression test may be performed during the exam. In this test, the main artery in the neck (carotid artery) is briefly compressed, and changes in blood flow patterns are observed. A full TCD exam may last 30–45 minutes, and often longer in patients with disease.

flow, which can be detected by TCD. Flow rates are somewhat variable from person to person.

Abnormal results Lack of flow indicates a vessel has been completely blocked (although absence of a signal may also be due to absorption of sound waves by bone). If blood flows in the wrong direction or alternates between normal and reverse flow, it may mean there is a blockage elsewhere. This happens because blood is rerouted due to abnormalities in pressure caused by the blockage. If the speed of flow is increased, it may mean that blood is flowing through a restricted area that is just “upstream” from the probe. Intuitively, one might think that a restricted blood vessel would cause the speed of blood flow to slow down. However, the opposite is true. This is because the same amount of blood going through a narrower opening must go faster. Increased speed is also seen if a vessel is carrying rerouted blood. Resources BOOKS

Office Practice of Neurology. Ed. Martin Samuels and Steven Feske. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1996. von Reutern, G. M., and H. J. von Budingen. Ultrasound Diagnosis of Cerebrovascular Disease. New York: Georg Thieme Verlag, 1993.

Richard Robinson

Preparation No special preparation is needed. The patient should remove contact lenses, and may wish to avoid the use of eye makeup, since the gel is likely to smear it.

Aftercare The gel is washed off with soap and water. No other after care is needed.

Risks TCD is noninvasive and has no risks. A compression test is occasionally, though very rarely, hazardous for a patient with narrowed arteries (atherosclerosis), since the increased pressure may dislodge a piece of the substance that causes the narrowing (plaque).

Normal results TCD produces an audible sound that varies with the heartbeat. It also varies depending on the direction and rate of flow through the vessel being examined. Each of the vessels in the brain has a characteristic direction of 3364

Transesophageal echocardiography Definition Transesophageal echocardiography is a diagnostic test using an ultrasound device that is passed into the esophagus of the patient to create a clear image of the heart muscle and other parts of the heart. A tube with a device called a transducer is passed down into the patient’s throat and into the esophagus (the food tube that connects the mouth to the stomach). The transducer directs ultrasound waves into the heart, and the reflected sound waves picked up by the transducer are translated into an image of the heart.

Purpose Since the esophagus is right next to the heart, transesophageal echocardiography provides a very clear picGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Precautions Patients should avoid consuming alcohol for a day or so before the procedure, since alcohol may amplify the effects of the sedative used with the procedure.

Description Echocardiography creates an image of the heart using ultra-high-frequency sound waves—sound waves that are much too high in frequency to be heard by the human ear. The technique is very similar to ultrasound scanning commonly used to visualize the fetus during pregnancy. A transesophageal echocardiography examination generally lasts 30–60 minutes. The patient is given a mild sedative and the back of the throat is sprayed with a local anesthetic, in order to suppress the gag reflex. Next, a special viewing tube called an endoscope, containing a tiny transducer, is passed through the mouth and into the esophagus. It is carefully moved until it is positioned directly next to the heart. Essentially a modified microphone, the transducer directs ultrasound waves into the heart, some of which get reflected (or “echoed”) back to the transducer. Different tissues and blood all reflect ultrasound waves differently. These sound waves can be translated into a meaningful image of the heart, which is displayed on a monitor or recorded on paper or tape. The transducer may be moved several times during the test to help doctors get a better view of the heart.

wise, the patient may accidentally inhale some of the food or beverage. If a sedative has been given, patients should not drive or operate heavy machinery for at least 10-12 hours. They should avoid consuming alcohol for a day or so, since alcohol may amplify the effect of the sedative.

Risks Transesophageal echocardiography may cause gagging and discomfort when the transducer is passed down into the throat. Patients may also experience sore throat for a few days after the test. In rare cases, the procedure may cause bleeding or perforation of the esophagus or an inflammatory condition known as infective endocarditis. The patient may have an adverse reaction to the sedative or local anesthetic.

Normal results A normal transesophageal echocardiogram shows a normal heart structure and the normal flow of blood through the heart chambers and heart valves.

Abnormal results A transesophageal echocardiogram may show a number of abnormalities in the structure and function of the heart, such as thickening of the wall of the heart muscle (especially the left ventricle). Other abnormalities can include blood leaking backward through the heart valves (regurgitation), or blood clots in the left atrium of the heart. Resources BOOKS

Faculty Members of the Yale University School of Medicine. The Patient’s Book of Medical Tests. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1997. PERIODICALS

Rose, Verna L. “American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association Address the Use of Echocardiography.” American Family Physician 56 (7 Oct. 1997): 1489-90. ORGANIZATIONS

Preparation The patient may be given a mild sedative before the procedure, and an anesthetic is sprayed into the back of the throat in order to suppress the gag reflex.

Aftercare After the test, it is important to refrain from eating or drinking until the gag reflex has returned—otherGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. . National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105, Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. .

Robert Scott Dinsmoor

Transferrin test see Iron tests 3365

Transesophageal echocardiography

ture of the heart. It can provide information on the size of the heart, its pumping strength, and the location and extent of any damage to its tissues. It can detect abnormal tissue growth around the heart valves. It is also good at detecting abnormalities in the pattern of blood flow, such as the backward flow of blood through partly closed heart valves, known as regurgitation or insufficiency. It is especially useful in cases in which conventional echocardiography (a test where the transducer is kept on the patient’s chest) cannot offer a good image, such as when the patient is obese or has a thick chest wall. It is useful for monitoring heart function during cardiac surgery and detecting blood clots in the left atrium of the heart.

Transfusion

KEY TERMS Endoscope—An instrument used to see and examine the inside of a body cavity or organ. Gag reflex—A normal reflex consisting of elevation of the palate, retraction of the tongue, and contraction of the throat muscles. Regurgitation—Backward flow of blood through a partly closed valve. Transducer—A device that converts electrical signals into ultrasound waves and ultrasound waves back into electrical impulses. Ultrasound—Sound waves at a frequency of 20,000 kHz, often used for diagnostic imaging.

Transfusion Definition The process of transferring whole blood or blood components from one person (donor) to another (recipient).

Purpose Transfusions are given to restore lost blood, to improve clotting time, and to improve the ability of the blood to deliver oxygen to the body’s tissues.

Precautions For donors, the process of giving blood is very safe. Only sterile equipment is used and there is no chance of catching an infection from the equipment. There is a slight chance of infection at the puncture site if the skin is not properly washed before the collection needle is inserted. Some donors feel light-headed upon standing for the first time after donating. Occasionally, a donor will faint. Donors are advised to drink lots of liquids to replace the fluid lost with the donated blood. It is important to maintain the fluid volume of the blood so that the blood pressure will remain stable. Strenuous exercise should be avoided for the rest of the day. Most patients have very slight symptoms or no symptoms at all after donating blood. For recipients, a number of precautions must be taken. The blood given by transfusion must be matched with the recipient’s blood type. Incompatible blood types can cause a serious adverse reaction (transfusion reaction). Blood is introduced slowly by gravity flow directly 3366

into the veins (intravenous infusion) so that medical personnel can observe the patient for signs of adverse reactions. People who have received many transfusions can develop an immune response to some factors in foreign blood cells (see below). This immune reaction must be checked before giving new blood. Infectious diseases can also be transmitted through donated blood.

Description Either whole blood or blood components can be used for transfusion. Whole blood is used exactly as it was received from the donor. Blood components are parts of whole blood, such as red blood cells (RBCs), plasma, platelets, clotting factors, immunoglobulins, and white blood cells. Whole blood is used only when needed or when components are not available. Most of the time whole blood is not used because the patient’s medical condition can be treated with a blood component. Too much whole blood can raise a recipient’s blood pressure. High blood pressure can have medical side effects and should be avoided. Use of blood components is a more efficient way to use the blood supply, because blood that has been processed (fractionated) into components can be used to treat more than one person. Whole blood is generally used when a person has lost a lot of blood. Such blood loss can be caused by injury or surgical procedures. Whole blood is given to help restore the blood volume, which is essential for maintaining blood pressure. Whole blood is also given to ensure that the body’s tissues are receiving enough oxygen. Whole blood is occasionally given when a required blood component is unavailable in isolated form. Red blood cells are the blood component most frequently used for transfusion. RBCs are the only cells in the body that transport oxygen. A transfusion of RBCs increases the amount of oxygen that can be carried to the tissues of the body. RBCs that have been separated from the liquid plasma (packed RBCs) are given to people who have anemia or who have lost a lot of blood. Platelets are another component frequently given by transfusion. Platelets are a key factor in blood clotting. The clear fluid that carries blood cells (plasma) also contains blood-clotting factors. The platelets and plasma clotting factors are extracted from donated blood and concentrated for use. These factors are used to treat people with such clotting disorders, as hemophilia. Immunoglobulins, also called gamma globulin or immune serum, are collected from plasma for use in temporarily boosting the immune capability of a patient. White blood cells (WBCs) are another infection-fighting component of the blood. White blood cells are given by transfusion only rarely. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Each year in the United States, about 14,000,000 pints of blood are donated. Blood collection is strictly regulated by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The FDA has rules for the collection, processing, storage, and transportation of blood and blood products. In addition, the American Red Cross, the American Association of Blood Banks, and most states have specific rules for the collection and processing of blood. The main purpose of regulation is to ensure the quality of blood and to prevent the transmission of infectious diseases through donated blood. Before blood and blood products are used, they are extensively tested for such infectious agents as hepatitis and AIDS. DONORS. Blood donors are questioned about their general health, their lifestyle, and any medical conditions that might disqualify them as donors. These conditions include hepatitis, AIDS, cancer, heart disease, asthma, malaria, bleeding disorders, and high blood pressure. Screening prevents blood donation by people who could transmit diseases or by people whose medical condition would place them at risk if they donated blood. Some geographical areas or communities have a high rate of hepatitis or AIDS. Blood collection in most of these areas has been discontinued.

The blood pressure, temperature, and pulse of donors are taken to ensure that they are physically able to donate blood. One pint (450 ml) of blood is usually donated, although it is possible to donate smaller volumes. The average man has 10-12 pints and the average woman 8-9 pints of blood. Within hours after donating, most people have replaced the fluid lost with the donated blood, bringing their blood volume back to normal. Replacing donated blood cells and platelets can take several weeks. People with low blood pressure or anemia and pregnant women should not donate blood or should limit the amount of blood they donate. Generally, people are allowed to donate blood only once every two months. This delay ensures the health of the donor and discourages people from selling their blood. The practice of paying donors for blood has essentially stopped. Donors who sell blood tend to have a high risk for the transmission of infectious agents. BLOOD COLLECTION. Blood is collected from the donor by inserting a large needle into a vein in the arm. Usually, one of the larger veins near the inside of the elbow is used. A tourniquet is placed on the upper arm to increase the pressure in the arm veins and make them swell and become more accessible. Once a suitable vein is identified, the area where the needle will be inserted is sterilized by washing with soap solution or an iodinecontaining antiseptic. Sometimes both are used. The

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

donor lies on a bed or cot during the procedure, which takes about ten minutes. Generally, an 18-gauge needle is used. This needle can easily fit into the veins and yet is large enough that the blood flows easily. Blood will sometimes clot in a smaller needle and stop flowing. Blood is collected in sterile plastic bags that hold one pint (450 ml). The bags contain an anticoagulant to prevent clotting and preservatives to keep the blood cells alive. Properly handled and refrigerated, whole blood can last for 42 days. AUTOLOGOUS TRANSFUSION. Autologous transfusion is a procedure in which patients donate blood for their own use. Patients who are to undergo surgical procedures for which a blood transfusion might be required may elect to donate a store of blood for the purpose ahead of time. The blood is stored at the hospital for the exclusive use of the patient. This procedure assures that the blood type is an exact match. It also assures that no infection will be transmitted through the blood transfusion. DIRECTED DONATION. Directed donors are family or friends of the patient who needs a transfusion. Some people think that family and friends provide a safer source of blood than the general blood supply. Studies do not show that directed donor blood is any safer. Blood that is not used for the identified patient becomes part of the general blood supply. APHERESIS. Apheresis is a special procedure in which only the necessary components of a donor’s blood are collected. The remaining components are returned to the donor. A special blood-processing instrument is used in apheresis. It separates the blood into components, saves the desired component, and pumps all the other components back into the donor. Because donors give only part of their blood, they can donate more frequently. For example, people can give almost ten times as many platelets by apheresis as they could give by donating whole blood. BLOOD PROCESSING. A sample of the donator’s blood is collected at the time of donation and tested for infectious diseases. Blood is not used until the results from these tests confirm that it is safe. BLOOD TYPING. The donated blood is typed. There are major and minor blood types, also called blood groups. The major types are classified by the ABO system. This system groups blood by two substances, called antigen A and antigen B, in the red blood cells. The four ABO blood types are A, B, AB, and O. Type A blood has the A antigen, type B has the B antigen, type AB has both, and type O has neither. These four types of blood are further sorted by the Rh

3367

Transfusion

Blood donation

Transfusion

factor. The Rh, or rhesus factor, is also an antigen in the red blood cells. A person who has the Rh factor is Rh positive; a person who does not have the factor is Rh negative. If a person has red blood cells with both the B and the Rh antigens, that person is said to have a B positive (B+) blood type. Blood types determine what blood a patient can receive. Generally, patients are limited to receiving only blood of the exact same ABO and Rh type as their own. For example, a person with B+ blood can only receive blood or blood cells from another person with B+ blood. An exception is blood type O. O is called the universal donor, because people of all blood types can accept it. Blood can be typed by several other minor antigens, such as Kell, Duffy, and Lewis. These minor antigens can become important when a patient has received many transfusions. These patients tend to build up an immune response to the minor blood groups that do not match their own. Upon receiving a transfusion with a mismatched minor blood group, they may have an adverse reaction. A third group of antigens to which a patient can react are residues from the donor’s plasma that have attached to the RBCs. To eliminate this problem, the RBCs are rinsed to remove plasma residues. These rinsed cells are called washed RBCs. Blood components used in transfusion Most blood collected from donors is broken down (fractionated) into components that are used to treat specific problems or diseases. Treating patients with blood components is the most efficient way to use the blood supply. RED BLOOD CELLS. Red blood cells (RBCs) carry oxygen throughout the body. They obtain oxygen as they pass through the lungs and give up oxygen to the other tissues of the body as they are pumped through arteries and veins. When patients do not have enough RBCs to properly oxygenate their bodies, they can be given a transfusion with RBCs obtained from donors. RBCs are recovered from whole blood after donation. They are then typed, removed from the watery blood plasma to minimize the volume (packed), and stored. They are given to people who have anemia (including thalassemia), whose bone marrow does not make enough RBCs, or who have other conditions that decrease the number of RBCs in the blood. Occasionally, red blood cells from rare blood types are frozen. Once frozen, RBCs can survive for as long as ten years. Packed RBCs are given in the same manner as whole blood. PLASMA. Plasma is the liquid portion of blood. It contains many useful proteins, especially clotting factors and immunoglobulins. After they are processed,

3368

plasma or plasma factors (fractions) are usually frozen. Some plasma fractions are freeze-dried. These fractions include clotting factors I through XIII. Some people have an inherited disorder in which the body produces too little of the plasma clotting factors VIII (hemophilia A) or IX (hemophilia B). Transfusions of these clotting factors help people with hemophilia stop bleeding. Frozen plasma must be thawed before it is used and freeze-dried plasma must be mixed with liquid (reconstituted). In both cases, these blood fractions are usually small in volume and can be injected by syringe and needle. PLATELETS. Platelets are small bodies in the blood that are essential for clotting. People who do not have enough platelets have bleeding problems. People who have lymphoma, leukemia, or thrombocytopenia, and people who are receiving cancer therapy do not make enough platelets. Platelets have a very short shelf life; they must be used within five days of blood donation. Platelets are packed into bags. A platelet transfusion is given in the same manner as whole blood. IMMUNOGLOBULINS. Immunoglobulins are the infection-fighting fraction of blood plasma. They are also known as gamma globulin, antibodies, and immune serum. This blood fraction is given to people who have difficulty fighting infections, especially people whose immune systems are depressed by diseases, such as AIDS. Immunoglobulins are also used to prevent tetanus after cuts, to treat animal bites when rabies infection is suspected, or to treat severe childhood diseases. Generally, the volume used is small, and the immunoglobulins can be injected. WHITE BLOOD CELLS. White blood cells (WBCs) are another infection-fighting component of the blood. On rare occasions, white blood cells are given by transfusion to treat life-threatening infections. Such transfusions are given when the WBC count is very low or when WBCs are not functioning normally. Most of the time, however, antibiotics are used in these cases.

Preparation A person receiving a transfusion is treated in much the same way as a blood donor. The site where the needle will be inserted is carefully washed with a soap-based solution, followed by an iodine-containing antiseptic. The skin is then dried and the transfusion needle inserted into the recipient’s vein. During the early stages of a transfusion, the recipient is monitored closely to detect any adverse reactions. If no signs of adverse reaction are evident, the patient is monitored occasionally for the duration of the transfusion period. Upon completion of GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Aftercare Recipients of blood transfusion are monitored during and after the transfusion for signs of adverse reaction.

Risks Adverse reaction to mismatched blood (transfusion reaction) and transmission of infectious disease are the two major risks of blood transfusion. Transfusion reaction occurs when antibodies in the recipient’s blood react to foreign blood cells introduced by the transfusion. The antibodies bind to the foreign cells and destroy them (hemolytic reaction). Transfusion reaction may also cause a hypersensitivity of the immune system that, in turn, may cause tissue damage within the patient’s body. The patient may also have an allergic reaction to mismatched blood. The first symptoms of transfusion reaction are a feeling of general discomfort and anxiety. Breathing difficulties, flushing, a sense of pressure in the chest, and back pain may develop. Evidence of a hemolytic reaction can be seen in the urine, which will be colored from the waste of destroyed red blood cells. Severe hemolytic reactions are occasionally fatal. Reactions to mismatches of minor factors are milder. These symptoms include itchiness, dizziness, fever, headache, rash, and swelling. Sometimes the patient will experience breathing difficulties and muscle spasms. Most adverse reactions from mismatched blood are not life-threatening. The infectious diseases most often acquired from blood transfusion in the United States are hepatitis and AIDS. Patients who are given too much blood can develop high blood pressure, a concern for people who have heart disease. Very rarely, an air embolism is created when air is introduced into a patient’s veins through the tubing used for intravenous infusion. The danger of embolism is greatest when infusion is begun or ended. Care must be taken to ensure that all air is bled out of the tubing before infusion begins, and that infusion is stopped before air can enter the patients, blood system.

KEY TERMS ABO blood groups—A system in which human blood is classified by whether the red blood cells contain A or B antigens. Type A blood has the A antigen; type B has the B antigen, AB has both, and 0 has neither. Antibody—A simple protein produced by the body to destroy bacteria, viruses, or other foreign bodies. Production of each antibody is triggered by a specific antigen. Antigen—A substance that stimulates the immune system to manufacture antibodies (immunoglobulins). The function of antibodies is to fight off intruder cells, such as bacteria or viruses, in the body. Antigens stimulate the blood to fight other blood cells that have the wrong antigens. If a person with blood type A is given a transfusion with blood type B, the A antigens will fight the foreign blood cells as though they were an infection. Immunoglobulin—An antibody. Infusion—Introduction of a substance directly into a vein or tissue by gravity flow. Injection—Forcing a fluid into the body by means of a needle and syringe. Rh (rhesus) factor—An antigen present in the red blood cells of 85% of humans. A person with Rh factor is Rh positive (Rh+); a person without it is Rh negative (Rh-). The Rh factor was first identified in the blood of a rhesus monkey.

Transhepatic biliary catheterization Definition Transhepatic biliary catheterization is a surgical procedure during which a catheter is inserted into the bile duct to relieve an obstruction.

Resources BOOKS

Berkow, Robert, ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. Beutler, Ernest, ed, et al. Williams Hematology. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1995. Larsen, D. E., ed. Mayo Clinic Family Health Book. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc., 1996.

John T. Lohr, PhD GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Purpose Bile is a fluid made in the liver and stored in the gall bladder. The function of bile is to break down fats during digestion. When fatty foods move into the intestine, bile is released from the gall bladder, travels through the bile duct, and enters the first part of the small intestine (duodenum). 3369

Transhepatic biliary catheterization

the transfusion, a compress bandage is place over the needle-insertion site to prevent bleeding.

Transient ischemic attack

If the bile duct is blocked, the skin becomes yellowish (jaundiced), the abdomen is painful, and a fever develops. The bile duct can be blocked by gallstones, surgical injury, infection in the duct, or by tissue growth due to cancer. Transhepatic biliary catheterization is performed to relieve bile duct blockage. The most common reason for this procedure is to relieve obstruction from the overgrowth of cancer cells. Obstruction due to gallstones is usually cleared by other means.

Precautions Transhepatic biliary catheterization is done when cancer has progressed to the point where all the malignant cells cannot be removed by surgery. Patients who need transhepatic biliary catheterization often suffer from additional complications of their cancer. Because of the likelihood of bleeding from the liver, this procedure should not be done on patients who have blood clotting abnormalities.

Normal results Transhepatic biliary catheterization is a treatment, not a cure. Successful treatment relieves the blocked bile duct, but does not change the underlying conditions that caused the blockage. Resources BOOKS

“Insertion of a Catheter to Relieve Bile Duct Obstruction.” In Everything You Need to Know About Medical Treatments. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corp., 1996. ORGANIZATIONS

National Cancer Institute. Building 31, Room 10A31, 31 Center Drive, MSC 2580, Bethesda, MD 20892-2580. (800) 422-6237. . OTHER

“Extrahepatic Bile Duct Cancer.” National Cancer Institute Page. .

Tish Davidson

Description Transhepatic biliary catheterization is performed by inserting a needle through the skin, into the abdomen, through the liver, and into the bile duct. A wire attached to the needle then guides the catheter into place. The procedure can take several hours. The patient is given medication for pain. The catheter can either reestablish bile flow into the duodenum or reroute the bile so it drains into a bag outside the body. The choice depends on the extent and position of the obstruction.

Preparation The standard preoperative blood tests are performed. The patient should not eat or drink the day of the procedure.

Aftercare The patient must stay in bed after the procedure for at least six hours, to reduce the risk of bleeding. A nurse checks vital signs and looks for indications of complication such as pain, cramping, or leakage around the catheter. The catheter is flushed periodically to keep it open. Patient and caregiver education on how to keep the catheter clean and irrigated is an important part of aftercare.

Risks The most common complication of transhepatic biliary catheterization is bleeding as a result of puncturing the liver. Infection may also result from this procedure. Sometimes the catheter itself becomes blocked and is ineffective. 3370

Transient ischemic attack Definition A transient ischemic attack, or TIA, is often described as a mini-stroke. Unlike a stroke, however, the symptoms can disappear within a few minutes. TIAs and strokes are both caused by a disruption of the blood flow to the brain. In TIAs and most strokes, this disruption is caused by a blood clot blocking one of the blood vessels leading to the brain. The blockage produces symptoms such as sudden weakness or numbness on one side of the body, sudden dimming or loss of vision, and difficulty speaking or understanding speech. If the symptoms are caused by a TIA, they last less than 24 hours and do not cause brain damage. Stroke-associated symptoms, on the other hand, do not go away and may cause brain damage or death. TIAs can serve as an early warning sign of stroke and require immediate medical attention.

Description Strokes are the third leading cause of death in the United States and the leading cause of disability. Approximately 500,000-600,000 people have strokes each year, and more than 160,000 die as a result. About 85% of these strokes are classified as ischemic. In ischemic stroke, a blood vessel leading to the brain GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Approximately 10% of strokes are preceded by one or more TIAs. The estimated annual number of TIAs is about 50,000; an exact count is difficult because TIAs are not always reported. They may be under-reported because they typically last less than an hour, perhaps only for a few minutes. Because they are so brief, TIAs may not seem important. However, an estimated onethird of all TIAs are followed by a stroke within five years. They are considered a medical emergency and prompt medical attention is very important. Risk factors for strokes and TIAs are very similar. The risk of a TIA or stroke is higher among men, African Americans, people over age 65, and people with heart disease or diabetes. Smokers, people with high blood pressure, and people who are overweight also have a greater risk for TIAs and strokes.

Causes and symptoms A TIA is caused by a temporary blockage of one of the arteries that leads into the brain. Small blood clots, called microemboli, are the immediate cause of the blockage. The blockage forms because of damage or disease within the circulatory system. Blood clots can form in blood vessels because of artery damage, heart disease, and other cardiovascular problems. For example, atherosclerosis is strongly associated with TIAs. Atherosclerosis is the build-up of fatty deposits or plaque at certain areas in the circulatory system. Clotting cells in blood, called platelets, tend to stick to atherosclerotic plaques or other damaged sites within blood vessels. Occasionally, a clot may grow large enough to block a blood vessel, or a piece of a clot may break off and circulate to other areas of the body. If a clot does not dissolve quickly enough, it can lodge in a blood vessel and block it. In TIAs, the microemboli dissolve within a short time. Blood flows into the brain through two main pathways: the carotid arteries and the vertebrobasilar arteries. The carotid arteries are located on the front of the neck; the vertebrobasilar arteries are at the base of the skull at the back of the head. The symptoms produced by a TIA are determined by the arteries affected. If a vertebrobasilar artery is blocked, common symptoms include double vision and dizziness, nausea GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

and vomiting, difficulty speaking, and problems understanding and using spoken words. There may also be a numbness around the mouth and a tingling sensation in the limbs. Blockage of a carotid artery produces complete loss of vision, dimmed or foggy vision, and paralysis or weakness on one side of the body. These symptoms may also be accompanied by language problems and speech difficulty. With either type of blockage, the microemboli dissolve within hours and full function returns.

Diagnosis The goal of diagnosis is to identify the precise cause of the TIA and to recommend treatment. Initial information that an individual can supply includes a medical history, what drugs are currently being taken and why, and a full description of the symptoms. Blood tests are ordered to screen blood counts—that is, the numbers of specific blood cell types—and to measure sugar and lipid (fats, including cholesterol) levels. Based on this information and a physical examination that includes blood pressure, pulse, and respiration measurements, one or more of the following imaging tests are ordered. A computed tomography scan (CT scan) or a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan is usually the first imaging test. CT or MRI can rule out other problems, such as a tumor or subdural hematoma, which can mimic the symptoms of a TIA. A CT scan can also uncover aneurysms and arteriovenous malformation, both of which are blood vessel abnormalities that can cause bleeding in the brain. Another imaging test that is very useful is carotid ultrasonography, a noninvasive procedure that allows examination of the interior of the carotid artery. This examination can detect carotid stenosis, a condition in which the artery is abnormally narrow because of atherosclerosis. Ultrasonography is very reliable in identifying stenosis, but it does not give enough information to accurately assess the degree of stenosis. Because the treatment used depends on the degree of stenosis, treatment decisions cannot be based on ultrasonography. Another type of ultrasonography, called transcranial doppler ultrasonography, is used to detect stenosis of the blood vessels within the brain and in the vertebrobasilar arteries. If stenosis is identified, a further test called cerebral arteriography may be done. This test is not done if the individual is in poor health, because it may be too risky. Arteriography involves injecting a special dye into the blood vessels which makes them visible on x rays. This procedure is also used to find suspected 3371

Transient ischemic attack

becomes blocked and an area of the brain is deprived of oxygenated blood. (The other 15% of strokes are caused by bleeding from a blood vessel that has ruptured.) Without the blood supply, the cells in that area of the brain die. Since brain cells cannot grow back, the functions that are controlled by that brain area may be permanently lost.

Transient ischemic attack

KEY TERMS Angioplasty—A medical procedure in which a catheter, or thin tube, is threaded through blood vessels. The catheter is used to place a balloon or stent (a small metal rod) at an area of stenosis and expand it mechanically. Arteriography—A medical test in which an x-ray visible dye is injected into blood vessels. This dye allows the blood vessels to be imaged with x rays. Atherosclerosis—A build-up of fatty tissue called plaque inside arteries that can impede or block blood flow. Carotid artery—One of the major blood vessels leading to the brain; it runs up the front of the neck. Echocardiography—A type of ultrasonography that is used to create an image of the heart and its functioning. Endarterectomy—A surgical procedure in which diseased tissue and atherosclerotic plaque are removed from the inside of an artery. Ischemia—A condition in which blood flow is cut off or restricted from a particular area. The sur-

problems with blood vessels in the brain. Because it is an invasive procedure, complications may arise. Typically, these complications are minor and temporary. In a very small percentage of people with cardiovascular disease, the procedure may cause serious complications, such as stroke. Although TIAs affect the brain, the ultimate cause of the problem may be found in the heart. Heart disease or damage to the heart’s blood vessels is assessed by echocardiography. Echocardiography is a type of ultrasonography and is a noninvasive procedure.

Treatment Treatment is aimed at preventing further TIAs and especially at preventing a stroke. The particular therapy depends on the root cause of the TIA and is not begun until this cause is identified. If at all possible, drug therapy is the preferred method of treating TIAs. Surgical intervention may be required if an individual’s situation is not likely to respond to medication or if medication has failed. Aspirin is often chosen for drug therapy. It is sometimes called a blood thinner because it blocks the func3372

rounding tissue, starved of oxygen and nutrients, dies. Microemboli—Small blot clots in the bloodstream. Platelets—Tiny cells in the blood that help form blood clots. Stenosis—The narrowing of an opening or passageway in the body. In arteries, stenosis is caused by a build-up of atherosclerotic plaque, disease, or other disorder. Stroke—A condition in which blood flow to the brain has been blocked, thereby causing brain cells to die from lack of oxygen and nutrients; also called a “brain attack.” Ultrasonography—A medical test in which sound waves are directed against internal structures in the body. As sound waves bounce off the internal structure, they create an image on a video screen. Vertebrobasilar arteries—Major blood vessels that lead to the brain. They are located at the base of the skull at the back of the head.

tion of platelets, the sticky cells that trigger blood clotting. Since aspirin can cause gastrointestinal side effects, other drugs may be prescribed. These drugs include dipyridamole or ticlopidine hydrochloride (Ticlid). Dipyridamole, which works by relaxing the smooth muscles of the arteries, is not as effective as aspirin. Ticlopidine hydrochloride is an anti-platelet drug that is slightly more effective than aspirin, especially in women. However, it may cause diarrhea or lowered blood cell counts. Blood tests must, therefore, be done frequently when patients are taking ticlopidine. If carotid arteriography reveals at least a 70% blockage of the carotid artery, surgical treatment is usually recommended. The particular surgical method is called carotid endarterectomy. In endarterectomy, the artery is opened and the material clogging it is removed. Another procedure, called angioplasty, has been suggested for treating carotid stenosis, but it is not widely used. This procedure is performed by threading a thin tube through the blood vessel to the site that is clogged. A balloon or a stent (a slender rod) is then passed through the tube to mechanically widen the narrowed area. This procedure is successfully used in other blood vessels in the body, but there is some worry that GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Treatment of TIAs also focuses on underlying problems. High blood pressure, heart disease, and high levels of blood lipids all require medical intervention. Condition-specific medications are often prescribed and lifestyle changes are strongly encouraged. These changes include giving up smoking or excess alcohol consumption, engaging in physical exercise, and eating sensibly.

Prognosis One-third of TIAs are followed by stroke in next five years; in the other two-thirds, the TIAs may either continue or disappear on their own. However, because of the risk of stroke-related disability and death, all TIAs should be treated as emergency medical situations. Medical treatment significantly decreases the risk of stroke for people who experience one or more TIAs. Anti-platelet therapy with aspirin or ticlopidine may reduce risk as much as 31%. Carotid endarterectomy also substantially reduces stroke risk. The procedure itself carries some risk, but the complication rate is less than 5%. The risk of complication can be lowered by choosing to have the procedure done in a facility experienced with it and by a surgeon with a low complication rate.

Prevention Treatment for TIAs is complemented by lifestyle changes. These practices may also prevent TIAs and strokes from ever occurring. Doctors and other healthcare providers universally recommend that individuals stop smoking and consume alcohol in moderation. Regular health checkups can detect high blood pressure, heart disease, and other underlying problems. Adhering to treatment for these problems can help minimize TIA and stroke risks. Finally, maintaining a healthy weight and engaging in regular exercise as able are strongly recommended. Resources BOOKS

Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1998. 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. PERIODICALS

Edmeads, John G. “Transient Ischemic Attacks: Rethinking Concepts in Management.” Postgraduate Medicine 96, no. 5 (Oct. 1994): 42. Hinkle, Janice L. “New Developments in Managing Transient Ischemic Attack and Acute Stroke.” AACN Clinical Issues 8, no. 2 (May 1997): 205. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. . National Stroke Association. 9707 E. Easter Lane, Englewood, Co. 80112. (800) 787-6537. .

Julia Barrett

Transplant reaction screening test see Cytomegalovirus antibody screening test Transplantation see Corneal transplantation; Hair transplantation; Heart transplantation; Kidney transplantation; Lung transplantation; Pancreas transplantation

Transposition of the great arteries Definition Transposition of the great arteries is a birth defect causing a fatal condition in which there is a reversal, or switch, in the truncal connections of the two main (great) blood vessels to the heart, the aorta and pulmonary artery.

Description There are two great arteries, the pulmonary artery and the aorta. Normally, the pulmonary artery carries blood from the right ventricle to the lungs. The aorta carries blood from the left ventricle to the vessels of the rest of the body. Normally, blood returning to the heart is depleted in oxygen. It goes first to the right atrium of the heart and then to the right ventricle where it is pumped to the lungs. While in the lungs, the blood picks up more oxygen. After the lungs, the blood flows to the left atrium, then the left ventricle, which pumps the blood out through the aorta to the rest of the body, thereby supplying the body with oxygenated blood. Transposition of the great arteries results in oxygen-depleted blood going to the body. The reason is that the connection of the two great arteries is reversed. In this case, the aorta is connected to the right ventricle. Blood returning to the heart goes to the right atrium and ventricle, which is normal. Then, when the right ventricle pumps the blood out, it goes into the aorta for distri3373

Transposition of the great arteries

using it close to the brain may be too dangerous. Surgical treatment of blockage of the vertebrobasilar arteries is not usually recommended.

Transurethral bladder resection

bution throughout the body. At the same time, blood in the lungs goes to the left atrium, the left ventricle, but then back to the lungs. This happens because the pulmonary artery is connected to the left ventricle. The result is that highly-oxygenated blood keeps recycling through the lungs, while oxygen-depleted blood recycles through the body without going through the lungs to reoxygenate. This condition develops during the fetal stage and must be treated promptly after birth if the newborn is to survive. The newborn can survive for a few days because the foramen ovale, a small hole in the septum that separates the two atria, is open, allowing some oxygenated blood to escape and mix into the blood that is being pumped throughout the body. However, the foramen ovale normally closes within a few days after birth.

Resources BOOKS

Alexander, R. W., R. C. Schlant, and V. Fuster, eds. The Heart. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998. Berkow, Robert, ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. Larsen, D. E., ed. Mayo Clinic Family Health Book. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc., 1996.

John T. Lohr, PhD

Transsexualism see Gender identity disorder

Causes and symptoms Transposition of the great arteries is a birth defect that occurs during fetal development. There is no identifiable disease or cause. The main symptom is a “blue” baby appearance, caused by a general lack of oxygen in the body’s tissues.

Diagnosis Diagnosis is made immediately after birth, when it is observed that the newborn is lacking oxygen. This is noted by the bluish color of the newborn, indicating cyanosis, a lack of oxygen. A definite diagnosis is made by x ray, electrocardiography (ECG), and echocardiography.

Treatment The only treatment for this condition is prompt heart surgery shortly after birth. In surgery, the two great arteries are reconnected to their proper destination. This restores the normal blood flow pattern. The coronary arteries are also reconnected, so that they can supply blood to the heart itself. A catheter may be used to maintain or enlarge the opening between the two atria until surgery can be performed.

Prognosis Left untreated, this disease is fatal within the first weeks of life.

Prevention Because there is no identifiable cause, there is no way to prevent this condition. 3374

Transurethral bladder resection Definition Transurethral bladder resection is a surgical procedure, performed under sedation or anesthesia, with a lighted tube inserted through the urethra (the small tubelike structure that allows urine to empty from the bladder), into the bladder. It plays both a diagnostic and therapeutic role in the treatment of bladder cancers.

Purpose Tranurethral resection is the initial form of treatment for bladder cancers. The procedure is performed to remove and examine bladder tissue and/or tumor. It may also serve to remove lesions and be the only treatment necessary for noninvasive tumors.

Description For this procedure, a lighted tube (resectoscope) is inserted through the urethra, into the bladder. A clear solution is infused to maintain visibility, and the tumor or tissue to be examined is cut away using an electric current. Tumor and muscle fibers are biopsied (a sample is cut out and examined, usually under a microscope) in order to evaluate the depth of tissue involvement, while avoiding perforation of the bladder wall. Every attempt is made to remove all visible tumor tissue, along with a small border of healthy tissue. The resected tissue is examined under the microscope for diagnostic purposes. An indwelling catheter may be inserted to ensure adequate drainage of the bladder postoperatively. At this GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Transverse myelitis Definition

Preparation Preoperative x rays with dye studies are helpful as a guide in determining the character and extent of tumor involved. As with any surgical procedure, the patient is asked to sign a consent form after the procedure is thoroughly explained.

Aftercare

Transverse myelitis (TM) is an uncommon neurological syndrome caused by inflammation (a protective response which includes swelling, pain, heat, and redness) of the spinal cord, characterized by weakness, back pain, and bowel and bladder problems. It affects one to five persons per million.

Description

As with any surgical procedure, blood pressure and pulse will be monitored. Urine is expected to be bloodtinged in the early postoperative period. Continuous bladder irrigation (rinsing) may be used for approximately 24 hours after surgery. Most operative sites should be completely healed in three months. The patient is followed closely for possible recurrence with visual examination, using a special viewing device (cystoscope) at regular intervals as the physician deems necessary.

Abnormal results Complications of the procedure may include bleeding, which may require bladder irrigation postoperatively, during which time the patient’s activity is limited to bedrest. Perforation of the bladder is another risk, in which case the urinary catheter is left in place for four to five days postoperatively. The patient is started on antibiotic therapy preventively. If the bladder is lacerated, accompanied by spillage of urine into the abdomen, an abdominal incision may be required. Resources BOOKS

Dollinger, Malin, et al. Everyone’s Guide to Cancer Therapy: How Cancer is Diagnosed, Treated, and Managed Day to Day. 3rd ed. Kansas City: Andres & McMeel, 1998. Hanno, Philip, and Alan Wein. Clinical Manual of Urology. Philadelphia: McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1994. Lerner, Judith. Mosby’s Manual Of Urologic Nursing. St. Louis: The C. V. Mosby Co., 1982. ORGANIZATIONS

American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30329-4251. (800) 227-2345. . National Cancer Institute. Building 31, Room 10A31, 31 Center Drive, MSC 2580, Bethesda, MD 20892-2580. (800) 422-6237. .

Kathleen D. Wright, RN GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

TM affects the entire thickness of the spinal cord, producing both sensory and movement problems. It is believed to be linked to the immune system, which may be prompted to attack the body’s own spinal cord. Striking rapidly without warning, its effects can be devastating.

Causes and symptoms Transverse myelitis has many different causes, often triggered by a variety of viral and bacterial infections (especially those associated with a rash such as measles or chickenpox). Once the infection subsides, the inflammation in the cord begins. About a third of patients experience a flu-like illness with fever about the time they develop symptoms of TM. Sometimes, there appears to be a direct invasion of, and injury to, the spinal cord by an infectious agent (such as herpes zoster or the AIDS virus). TM can also accompany a variety of diseases that break down tissue that surrounds and insulates the nerves (demyelinating diseases), such as multiple sclerosis (MS). Some toxic substances, such as carbon monoxide, lead, or arsenic, can cause a type of myelitis characterized by inflammation followed by hemorrhage or bleeding that destroys the entire circumference of the spinal cord. Other types of myelitis can be caused by poliovirus; herpes zoster; rabies, smallpox or poliovaccination; or parasitic and fungal infections. Many experts believe that TM can occur without any apparent cause, probably as the result of an autoimmune process. This means that a person’s immune system attacks the spinal cord, causing inflammation and tissue damage. Regardless of the cause of the myelitis, onset of symptoms is sudden and rapid. Problems with movement and sensation appear within one or two days after inflammation begins. Symptoms include soft (flaccid) 3375

Transverse myelitis

time, interstitial radiation therapy may be initiated if necessary.

Traumatic amputations

paralysis of the legs, with pain in the lower legs or back, followed by loss of feeling and sphincter (muscles which close an opening, as in the anus) control. The earliest symptom may be a girdle-like sensation around the trunk. The extent of damage occuring will depend on how much of the spinal cord is affected, but TM rarely involves the arms. Severe spinal cord damage also can lead to shock.

Diagnosis A doctor will suspect transverse myelitis in any patient with a rapid onset of paralysis. Medical history, physical examination, brain and spinal cord scans, myelogram, spinal tap, and blood tests are used to rule out other neurological causes of symptoms, such as a tumor. If none of these tests suggest a cause for the symptoms, the patient is presumed to have transverse myelitis.

KEY TERMS Demyelinating disorders—A group of diseases characterized by the breakdown of myelin, the fatty sheath surrounding and insulating nerve fibers. This breakdown interferes with nerve function, and can result in paralysis. Multiple sclerosis is a demyelinating disorder. Myelogram—An x-ray examination of the brain and spinal cord with the aid of a contrast dye, to look for tumors or spinal cord injury.

Resources BOOKS

Stone, L. A. “Transverse Myelitis.” In Neuroimmunology for the Clinician, ed. L. A. Rolak and Y. Harati. New York: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1997. PERIODICALS

Treatment There is no effective treatment for transverse myelitis, but any underlying infection must be treated. After this, the focus of care shifts from diagnosis and treatment to learning how to live with the effects of the syndrome. Patients are helped to cope psychologically with new limitations, and are given physical rehabilitation. Physical adaptations include learning to cope with bowel and bladder control, sexuality, inability to control muscles (spasticity), mobility, pain, and activities of daily living (such as dressing). As nerve impulses from the spinal cord are often scrambled and misinterpreted by the brain as pain, painkillers are given to ease discomfort. Antidepressants or anticonvulsants may also help.

Scott, T.F., et.al. “Transverse Myelitis: Comparison with Spinal Cord Presentations of Multiple Sclerosis.” Neurology 50, no. 2 (Feb. 1998): 429-433. ORGANIZATIONS

Transverse Myelitis Association. 1787 Sutter Parkway, Powell, OH 43065-8806. (614) 766-1806. .

Carol A. Turkington

Tranylcypromine see Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

Traumatic amputations Definition

Prognosis The prognosis depends on how much of the cord was damaged. Some people recover completely, while others have lasting problems and need help in learning how to cope with activities of daily living. People who develop spastic reflexes early in the course of the condition are more likely to recover than those who do not. If spinal cord tissue death (necrosis) occurs, the chance of a complete recovery is poor. Most recovery occurs within the first three months. A certain percentage of patients with TM will go on to develop multiple sclerosis. 3376

Traumatic amputation is the accidental severing of some or all of a body part. A complete amputation totally detaches a limb or appendage from the rest of the body. In a partial amputation, some soft tissue remains attached to the site.

Description Trauma is the second leading cause of amputation in the United States. About 30,000 traumatic amputations occur in this country every year. Four of every five traumatic amputation victims are male, and most of them are between the ages of 15–30. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Traumatic amputations

Traumatic amputation most often affects limbs and appendages like the arms, ears, feet, fingers, hands, legs, and nose.

Causes and symptoms Farm and factory workers have greater-than-average risks of suffering injuries that result in traumatic amputation. Automobile and motorcycle accidents and the use of lawnmowers, saws, and power tools are also common causes of traumatic amputation. Blood loss may be massive or minimal, depending on the nature of the injury and the site of the amputation. Patients who lose little blood and have less severe injuries sometimes feel more pain than patients who bleed heavily and whose injuries are life-threatening.

Diagnosis When the patient and the amputated part(s) reach the hospital, an Emergency Department physician will assess the probability that the severed tissue can be successfully reattached.

This man’s hand was surgically reattached following a traumatic amputation. (Photograph by Michael English, M.D., Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

The Mangled Extremity Severity Score (MESS) assigns numerical values to such factors as body temperature, circulation, numbness, paralysis, tissue health, and the patient’s age and general health. This is one of the diagnostic tools used to determine how successful reattachment surgery is apt to be. The total score is doubled if blood supply to the amputated part has been absent or diminished for more than six hours.

• Contact the nearest emergency services provider, clearly describe what has happened, and follow any instructions given.

A general, emergency, or orthopedic surgeon makes the final determination about whether surgery should be performed. The surgeon also considers the patient’s wishes and lifestyle. Additional concerns are how and to what extent the amputation will affect the patient’s quality of life and ability to perform everyday activities.

Treatment First aid or emergency care given immediately after the amputation has a critical impact on both the physicians’ ability to salvage and reattach the severed part(s) and the patient’s ability to regain feeling and function. Muscle tissue dies quickly, but a well-preserved part can be successfully reattached as much as 24 hours after the amputation occurs. Tissue that has not been preserved will not survive for more than six hours.

• Make sure the victim can breathe; administer CPR if necessary. • Control bleeding, using direct pressure but minimizing or avoiding contact with blood and other body fluids. • Patients should not be moved if back, head, leg, or neck injuries are suspected or if motion causes pain. If none are found by the EMT, lie the victim flat, with the feet raised 12 inches above the surface. • Cover the victim with a coat or blanket to prevent shock. The injured site should be cleansed with a sterile solution and wrapped in a clean towel or other thick material that will protect the wound from further injury. Tissue that is still attached to the body should not be forced back into place. If it cannot be gently replaced, it should be held in its normal position and supported until additional care is available. Saving the patient’s life is always more important than recovering the amputated part(s). Transporting the patient to a hospital or emergency center should never be delayed until missing pieces are located. Preserving tissue

Initial response The most important steps to take when a traumatic amputation occurs are: GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

No amputated body part is too small to be salvaged. Debris or other contaminating material should be removed, but the tissue should not be allowed to get wet. 3377

Traveler’s diarrhea

Resources

KEY TERMS Phantom pain—Pain, tingling, itching, or numbness in the place where the amputated part used to be.

An amputated body part should be wrapped in bandages, towels, or other clean, protective material and sealed in a plastic bag. Placing the sealed bag in a cooler or in a container that is inside a second container filled with cold water or ice will help prevent tissue deterioration.

Prognosis

BOOKS

Sheehy, Susan Budassi. Manual of Emergency Care. St. Louis: The C. V. Mosby Co., 1990. ORGANIZATIONS

American Amputation Foundation, Inc. P.O. Box 250218, Hillcrest Station, Little Rock, AR 72225. (501) 666-2523. The Amputee Coalition of America. P.O. Box 2528, Knoxville, TN 37901-2528. (888) 267-5669. . OTHER

“Amputation.” ThriveOnline. 23 May 1998 . “Amputation, Traumatic.” HealthAnswers.com 24 May 1998 .

Maureen Haggerty

Possible complications of traumatic amputation include: • excessive bleeding • infection • muscle shortening • pulmonary embolism Improved medical and surgical care and rehabilitation have improved the long-term outlook for these patients. Phantom pain About 80% of all amputees over the age of four experience tingling, itching, numbness, or pain in the place where the amputated part used to be. Phantom sensations may begin immediately after the amputation, or they may develop months or years later. They often occur after an injury to the site of the amputation. These intermittent feelings may: • occur frequently or only once in a while • be mild or intense • last for a few minutes or several hours • help patients adjust more readily to an artificial limb (prosthesis)

Prevention The best way to prevent traumatic amputation is to observe common-sense precautions like using seat belts and obeying speed limits and other traffic regulations. It is important to take special precautions when using potentially dangerous equipment and make sure machinery is turned off and disconnected before attempting to service or repair it. Appropriate protective clothing should be worn at all times. 3378

Traveler’s diarrhea Definition The occurrence of multiple loose bowel movements in someone traveling to an area outside of their usual surroundings (usually from temperate industrialized regions to tropical areas), is known as traveler’s diarrhea (TD). The cause is almost always due to a bacterial or viral infection, acquired through ingesting contaminated food or water.

Description It is estimated that anywhere from 20–50% of the 12–20 million travelers going from temperate industrialized countries to the tropics will develop TD. Fortunately, most of these episodes are of short duration; nevertheless, about 40% of those affected will need to rearrange their schedule, and 20% will be ill enough to remain in bed for some days. The chance of winding up with TD is directly related to the area one is traveling to; only about 8% of individuals visiting an industrialized country are affected, whereas at least half of those traveling to non-industrialized regions become ill. It is also clearly related to the number of potentially contaminated foods or beverages consumed. Attention to recommended guidelines regarding food safety and sanitation can greatly decrease the risk of infection.

Causes and symptoms Bacterial infections are the most common cause of the illness. Viruses and occasional parasites can also be GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Rotaviruses and a parvovirus called Norwalk agent are also responsible for TD. Giardia is probably the most common parasite identified, though amoebas (Entamoeba histolytica), Cryptosporidium, and Cyclospora are being found with increasing frequency. Younger age groups, particularly students, are at greatest risk, probably because of where and what they eat. Individuals over 55 years of age, persons staying with relatives, or business travelers are at lower risk. Foods with the highest chance of transmitting disease are uncooked vegetables, unpeeled fruits, meat, and seafood. Tap water and even ice can be dangerous unless one is sure of the source. Symptoms usually start within a few days after arrival, but can be delayed for as long as two weeks. Illness lasts an average of three to five days, but is sometimes longer. Cramping abdominal pain, lack of appetite, and diarrhea are the main complaints. In approximately 10% of patients, diarrhea turns bloody and fever develops in about half of those. The presence of bloody bowel movements and fever usually indicates a more severe form of illness and makes Shigella a more likely cause. Medications that decrease the motility or contractions of the intestine, such as loperamide (Imodium) or diphenoxylate (Lomotil), should not be used when fever or bleeding occur. Complications Diarrhea varies from a few loose stools per day to 10 or more. Dehydration and changes in the normal blood pH (acid-base balance) are the main dangers associated with TD. Signs of dehydration can be hard to notice, but increasing thirst, dry mouth, weakness or lightheadedness (particularly if worsening while standing), or a darkening/decrease in urination are suggestive. Severe dehydration and changes in the body’s chemistry can lead to kidney failure and become life-threatening. Another potential complication is “toxic megacolon,” in which the colon gradually stretches and its wall thins to the point where it can tear. The presence of a hole in the intestine leads to peritonitis and is fatal unless quickly recognized and treated. Other complications related to TD can involve the nervous system, skin, blood, or kidneys. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Diagnosis The occurrence of diarrhea in an individual while traveling is very suggestive of TD. Although there are other possible causes, these are less likely. In most instances, the specific organism responsible for the symptoms does not need to be identified, and the majority of patients need only rest and treatment to avoid potential complications. When patients develop fever or bloody diarrhea, the illness is more serious and a specific diagnosis is needed. In those cases, or when symptoms last longer than expected, stool samples are obtained to identify the organism. For this purpose, laboratories can either try to grow (culture) the organism, or identify it with high-powered microscopes (electron microscopy) or with the use of special tests or stains. These can show parasites such as Giardia, Amoeba, Cryptosporidium and others in freshly obtained stool specimens. New techniques that involve identification of DNA (the characteristic material that controls reproduction and is unique for all individuals) of the various organisms, can also be used in special circumstances.

Treatment The best treatment of TD is prevention; however, once disease occurs, therapy is aimed at preventing or reducing dehydration, and using antibiotics when needed. Fortunately, severe dehydration is unusual in patients with TD, but any fluid losses should be treated early with either fruit juices and “clear fluids” such as tea or broth, or with the recommended Oral Rehydration Solutions (ORS) suggested by the World Health Organization (WHO). Persons traveling to known areas of infection should consult with their physician prior to departure and obtain appropriate instructions. For example, it may be advised to take along pre-prepared packets of ORS designed for easy mixing or commercial preparations such as Pedialyte, Ceralyte, Ricelyte, etc. When nothing else is available, the following WHO recipe can be made up from household items and taken in small frequent sips; • table salt: 3/4 teaspoon • baking powder: 1 teaspoon • orange juice: 1 cup • water: 1 quart or liter A debate has occurred in the medical community over the amount of salt (sodium) in the WHO preparations; some physicians feel that the content is too much for use by well-nourished persons in developed countries. Therefore these preparations should not be used for extended periods of time without consulting a physician. 3379

Traveler’s diarrhea

the cause. As for the bacteria involved, toxin producing types of E. coli (called enterotoxigenic) account for approximately 40–60% of cases, with Campylobacter and Shigella each reported in at least 10% of cases. In some studies, Campylobacter has accounted for almost half of the attacks, especially during cooler seasons of the year. The cause can vary depending on several factors, including the season and country visited. More than one organism can be found in 15–30% of cases, and none is identified in up to 40% of cases worldwide.

Traveler’s diarrhea

KEY TERMS Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS)—A liquid preparation developed by the World Health Organization that can decrease fluid loss in persons with diarrhea. Originally developed to be prepared with materials available in the home, commercial preparations have recently come into use.

to experience diarrhea for at least one month. The majority of patients rapidly recover with minimal therapy. Some will suffer symptoms for even longer. The small number who continue to suffer symptoms will need careful evaluation to rule out the many causes of chronic diarrhea (such as lactase deficiency, irritable bowel syndrome, parasites, etc.). It is unusual for diarrhea caused by bacteria to last over two weeks; therefore, more prolonged diarrhea indicates a non-bacterial cause.

Prevention Pepto-Bismol (bismuth subsalicylate preparation) is effective in both preventing and treating TD. For treatment once symptoms begin, the drug must be taken more frequently than when used for prevention. Bismuth subsalicylate preparation (1 oz of liquid or two 262.5 mg tablets every 30 minutes for eight doses) has been shown to decrease the number of bowel movements and shorten the length of illness. However, there is some concern about the large doses of bismuth in patients with kidney disease; therefore patients should check with physicians before starting this or any other therapy. Patients should be aware that bismuth can turn bowel movements black in color. Medications designed to decrease intestinal motility and contractions such as loperamide (Imodium), diphenoxylate (Lomotil), or others are safest when used by those without fever or bloody bowel movements. The presence of either of these symptoms indicates a more severe form of colitis. Antibiotics are usually not needed, because most cases of TD rapidly improve with minimal treatment. For patients in whom symptoms are especially severe (4 or more stools per day or the onset of bloody diarrhea or fever), antibiotics are indicated. Individuals with less severe attacks can be treated with either antimotility medications or bismuth subsalicylate. Choice of an antibiotic should ideally be tailored to the most likely organism and then adjusted according to results of stool cultures. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (Bactrim) or ciprofloxacin (Cipro) are the antibiotics most often prescribed, but others are also used. The type and duration of treatment continues to be revised, and it is therefore extremely important that patients check with a physician prior to beginning treatment. In many instances, an antibiotic can be combined with an antimotility agent to provide the quickest relief.

Prognosis Up to 1% of patients with TD will become sick enough to require hospitalization, and 3% will continue 3380

The best means of prevention is avoiding foods, beverages, and food handling practices that lead to infection with the organisms that cause TD. One effective means to prevent TD is liquid PeptoBismol; this bismuth-containing compound has been shown to be very effective in reducing the incidence of TD. Tablets are now available, which are easier to carry. Two tablets four times a day is recommended, but use should not go beyond three weeks. Antibiotics can also prevent TD, but their use is controversial, unless it is absolutely necessary to avoid infection (such as someone on an important business trip). There is the tendency for bacteria in to become resistant to these medications if used excessively; and these drugs do have side effects which can be worse than the effects of TD. The benefits and risks of antibiotic treatment should be carefully weighed. Resources BOOKS

Butterton, Joan R., and Stephen Calderwood. “Acute Infectious Diarrheal Diseases and Bacterial Food Poisoning.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. Hamer, Davidson H., and Sherwood L. Gorbach. “Traveler’s Diarrhea.” In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, ed. Mark Feldman, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. Keystone, J. S, and P. E. Kozarsky. “Health Risks to Travelers.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. PERIODICALS

Dupont, Herbert L., et al. “Guidelines on Acute Infectious Diarrhea in Adults.” American Journal of Gastroenterology 92, no. 11 (1962, 1997). “Traveler’s Diarrhea: Don’t Let It Ruin Your Trip.” Mayo Clinic Health Letter (Jan. 1997). “When Microbes are on the Menu.” Harvard Health Letter (Dec. 1994): 4-5. OTHER

Centers for Disease Control. . GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

David Kaminstein, MD

Tremors Definition Tremor is an unintentional (involuntary), rhythmical alternating movement that may affect the muscles of any part of the body. Tremor is caused by the rapid alternating contraction and relaxation of muscles and is a common symptom of diseases of the nervous system (neurologic disease).

Description Occasional tremor is felt by almost everyone, usually as a result of fear or excitement. However, uncontrollable tremor or shaking is a common symptom of disorders that destroy nerve tissue, such as Parkinson’s disease or multiple sclerosis. Tremor may also occur after stroke or head injury. Other tremors appear without any underlying illness.

Causes and symptoms Tremor may be a symptom of an underlying disease, and it may be caused by drugs. It may also exist as the only symptom (essential tremor). Underlying disease Some types of tremor are signs of an underlying condition. About a million and a half Americans have Parkinson’s disease, a disease that destroys nerve cells. Severe shaking is the most apparent symptom of Parkinson’s disease. This coarse tremor features four to five muscle movements per second. The shaking is evident at rest but declines or disappears during movement. Other disorders that cause tremor are multiple sclerosis, Wilson’s disease, mercury poisoning, thyrotoxicosis, and liver encephalopathy. A tremor that gets worse during body movement is called an “intention tremor.” This type of tremor is a sign that something is amiss in the cerebellum, a region of the brain concerned chiefly with movement, balance and coordination. Essential tremor Many people have what is called “essential tremor,” in which the tremor is the only symptom. This type of shaking affects between three and four million Americans. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The cause of essential tremor is not known, although it is an inherited problem in more than half of all cases. The genetic condition has an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, which means that any child of an affected parent will have a 50% chance of developing the condition. Essential tremor most often appears when the hands are being used, whereas a person with Parkinson’s disease will most often have a tremor while walking or while the hands are resting. People with essential tremor will usually have shaking head and hands, but the tremor may involve other parts of the body. The shaking often begins in the dominant hand and may spread to the other hand, interfering with eating and writing. Some people also develop a quavering voice. Essential tremor affects men and women equally. The shaking often appears at about age 45, although the disorder may actually begin in adolescence or early adulthood. Essential tremor that begins very late in life is sometimes called “senile tremor.” Drugs and tremor Several different classes of drugs can cause tremor as a side effect. These drugs include amphetamines, antidepressant drugs, antipsychotic drugs, caffeine, and lithium. Tremor also may be a sign of withdrawal from alcohol or street drugs.

Diagnosis Close attention to where and how the tremor appears can help provide a correct diagnosis of the cause of the shaking. The source of the tremor can be diagnosed when the underlying condition is found. Diagnostic techniques that make images of the brain, such as computed tomography scan (CT scan) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), may help form a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis or other tremor caused by disorders of the central nervous system. Blood tests can rule out such metabolic causes as thyroid disease. A family history can help determine whether the tremor is inherited.

Treatment Neither tremor nor most of its underlying causes can be cured. Most people with essential tremor respond to drug treatment, which may include propranolol, primidone, or a benzodiazepine. People with Parkinson’s disease may respond to levodopa or other antiparkinson drugs. Research has shown that about 70% of patients treated with botulinum toxin A (Botox) have some improvement in tremor of the head, hand, and voice. Botulinum is derived from the bacterium Clostridium botulinum. This 3381

Tremors

Centers for Disease Control. .

Tremors

KEY TERMS Computed tomography (CT) scan—An imaging technique in which cross-sectional x rays of the body are compiled to create a three-dimensional image of the body’s internal structures. Essential tremor—An uncontrollable (involuntary) shaking of the hands, head, and face. Also called familial tremor because it is sometimes inherited, it can begin in the teens or in middle age. The exact cause is not known. Fetal tissue transplantation—A method of treating Parkinson’s and other neurological diseases by grafting brain cells from human fetuses onto the affected area of the human brain. Human adults cannot grow new brain cells but developing fetuses can. Grafting fetal tissue stimulates the growth of new brain cells in affected adult brains. Intention tremor—A rhythmic purposeless shaking of the muscles that begins with purposeful (voluntary) movement. This tremor does not affect muscles that are resting. Liver encephalopathy—A condition in which the brain is affected by a buildup of toxic substances that would normally be removed by the liver. The condition occurs when the liver is too severely damaged to cleanse the blood effectively. Multiple sclerosis—A degenerative nervous system disorder in which the protective covering of the nerves in the brain are damaged, leading to tremor and paralysis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging technique that uses a large circular magnet and radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the body. These signals are used to construct images of internal structures. Pallidotomy—A surgical procedure that destroys a small part of a tiny structure within the brain called the globus pallidus internus. This structure is part of the basal ganglia, a part of the brain

bacterium causes botulism, a form of food poisoning. It is poisonous because it weakens muscles. A very weak solution of the toxin is used in cases of tremor and paralysis to force the muscles to relax. However, some patients experience unpleasant side effects with this drug and cannot tolerate effective doses. For other patients, the drug becomes less effective over time. About half of patients don’t get any relief of tremor from medications. 3382

involved in the control of willed (voluntary) movement of the muscles. Parkinson’s disease—A slowly progressive disease that destroys nerve cells. Parkinson’s is characterized by shaking in resting muscles, a stooping posture, slurred speech, muscular stiffness, and weakness. Thalamotomy—A surgical procedure that destroys part of a large oval area of gray matter within the brain that acts as a relay center for nerve impulses. The thalamus is an essential part of the nerve pathway that controls intentional movement. By destroying tissue at a particular spot on the thalamus, the surgeon can interrupt the nerve signals that cause tremor. Thalamus—A large oval area of gray matter within the brain that relays nerve impulses from the basal ganglia to the cerebellum, both parts of the brain that control and regulate muscle movement. Thyrotoxicosis—An excess of thyroid hormones in the blood, causing a variety of symptoms that include rapid heart beat, sweating, anxiety, and tremor. Tremor control therapy—A method for controlling tremor by self-administered shocks to the part of the brain that controls intentional movement (thalamus). An electrode attached to an insulated lead wire is implanted in the brain; the battery power source is implanted under the skin of the chest, and an extension wire is tunneled under the skin to connect the battery to the lead. The patient turns on the power source to deliver the electrical impulse and interrupt the tremor. Wilson’s disease—An inborn defect of copper metabolism in which free copper may be deposited in a variety of areas of the body. Deposits in the brain can cause tremor and other symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.

Tremor control therapy Tremor control therapy is a type of treatment using mild electrical pulses to stimulate the brain. These pulses block the brain signals that trigger tremor. In this technique, the surgeon implants an electrode into a large oval area of gray matter within the brain that acts as a relay center for nerve impulses and is involved in generating GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Some patients experience complete relief with this technique, but for others it is of no benefit at all. About 5% of patients experience complications from the surgical procedure, including bleeding in the brain. The procedure causes some discomfort because patients must be awake while the implant is placed. Batteries must be replaced by surgical procedure every three to five years. Other surgical treatments A patient with extremely disabling tremor may find relief with a surgical technique called thalamotomy, in which the surgeon destroys part of the thalamus. However, the procedure is complicated by numbness, balance problems, or speech problems in a significant number of cases. Pallidotomy is another type of surgical procedure sometimes used to decrease tremors from Parkinson’s disease. In this technique, the surgeon destroys part of a small structure within the brain called the globus pallidus internus. The globus is part of the basal ganglia, another part of the brain that helps control movement. This surgical technique also carries the risk of disabling permanent side effects. Fetal tissue transplantation (also called a nigral implant) is a controversial experimental method to treat Parkinson’s disease symptoms. This method implants fetal brain tissue into the patient’s brain to replace malfunctioning nerves. Unresolved issues include how to harvest the fetal tissue and the moral implications behind using such tissue; the danger of tissue rejection; and how much tissue may be required. Although initial studies using this technique looked promising, there has been difficulty in consistently reproducing positive results. Small amounts of alcohol may temporarily (sometimes dramatically) ease the shaking. Some experts recommend a small amount of alcohol (especially before dinner). The possible benefits, of course, must be weighed against the risks of alcohol abuse.

Prognosis Essential tremor and the tremor caused by neurologic disease (including Parkinson’s disease) slowly get GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

worse and can interfere with a person’s daily life. While the condition is not life-threatening, it can severely disrupt a person’s everyday experiences.

Prevention Essential tremor and tremor caused by a disease of the central nervous system cannot be prevented. Avoiding use of stimulant drugs such as caffeine and amphetamines can prevent tremor that occurs as a side effect of drug use. Resources BOOKS

Greenberg, David A., et al. Clinical Neurology. 2nd ed. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1993. Weiner, William J., and Christopher Goetz. “Essential Tremor.” In Neurology for the Non-Neurologist. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1994. ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Neurology. 1080 Montreal Ave., St. Paul, MN 55116. (612) 695-1940. . American Parkinson Disease Association. 60 Bay Street, Suite 401, Staten Island, NY 10301. (800) 223-2732. . International Tremor Foundation. 7046 West 105th St., Overland Park, KS 66212. (913) 341-3880. National Parkinson Foundation. 1501 N.W. 9th Ave., Miami, FL 33136-1494. (800) 327-4545. .

Carol A. Turkington

Trench fever Definition Trench fever is a bacterial infection that causes repeated cycles of high fever.

Description The term trench fever refers to the crowded conditions in which troops fought in during World War I and World War II. Because the causative bacteria are passed among humans through contact with body lice, overcrowding, and conditions which interfere with good hygiene (including regular washing of clothing) soldiers were predispose to this disease. Currently, homeless people in the United States are sometimes diagnosed with this illness. The bacteria are sometimes passed through the bite of an infected tick. This can cause the illness in 3383

Trench fever

movement (thalamus). The electrode is attached to an insulated wire that runs through the brain and exits the skull where it is attached to an extension wire. The extension is connected to a generator similar to a heart pacemaker. The generator is implanted under the skin in the chest, and the extension is tunneled under the skin from the skull to the generator. The patient can control his or her tremor by turning the generator on with a hand-held magnet to deliver an electronic pulse to the brain.

Trichinosis

people who participate in outdoor activity and encounter ticks in that particular area.

powders are available to apply to clothing. Avoidance of areas known to harbor ticks or the use of insect repellents is necessary to avoid the type of infection passed by ticks.

Causes and symptoms Two different bacteria can cause trench fever: Bartonella quintana and Bartonella henselae.B. quintana is carried by body lice; B. henselae is carried by ticks. Infection with B. quintana occurs when an infected louse defecates while feeding on a human. When the person scratches, the feces (which are full of bacteria) are rubbed into the tiny wound. Infection with B. henselae occurs when an infected tick bites a human, passing the bacteria along through the tiny bite wound. Symptoms of trench fever begin about 2 weeks to a month after exposure to the bacteria. Sudden fever, loss of energy, dizziness, headache, weight loss, skin rash, severe muscle and bone pain can occur. Pain is particularly severe in the shins, leading to the nickname “shin bone fever.” The fever can reach 105°F (40.5°C) and stays high for five to six days at a time. The temperature then drops, and stays down for several days, usually recurring in fiveto six-day cycles. An individual may experience as many as eight cycles of fever with the illness.

Diagnosis Diagnosis is usually made on the basis of the patient’s symptoms, and on knowledge of the conditions in which the patient lives. A blood sample can be drawn and bacteria in the sample are allowed to grow. Identification is made by looking at the number of bacteria that may be present on a glass slide seen under the lens of a microscope. However, this technique can take up to four weeks, because this type of bacterium grows very slowly. By this time, the practitioner has often decided to treat the patient anyway.

Treatment Erythromycin and azithromycin are both used to treat trench fever. Four weeks of treatment are usually necessary. Inadequate treatment often results in a relapse. In fact, relapses have been reported to occur as long as 10 years after the first episode.

Prognosis Prognosis for patients with trench fever is excellent. Recovery may take a couple of months. Without treatment, there is always a risk of recurrence, even years after the original illness.

Prevention Prevention involves good hygiene and decent living conditions. When this is impossible, insecticide dusting 3384

Resources BOOKS

Corey, Lawrence. “Rickettsia and Coxiella.” In Sherris Medical Microbiology: An Introduction to Infectious Diseases. 3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. Tompkins, Lucy S. “Bartonella Infections, Including CatScratch Disease.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. PERIODICALS

Bovsun, Mara. “World War I’s Trench Fever Germ Making Comeback Among Poor, Homeless.” Biotechnology Newswatch (5 Jan. 1998): 6. Relman, David A. “Has Trench Fever Returned?” The New England Journal of Medicine 332, no. 7 (16 Feb. 1995): 463+. Tompkins, Lucy S. “Bartonella Species Infections, Including Cat-Scratch Disease, Trench Fever, and Bacillary Angiomatosis: What Molecular Techniques Have Revealed.” The Western Journal of Medicine 164, no. 1 (Jan. 1996): 39+. ORGANIZATIONS

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404) 639-3311. .

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Treponema carateum infection see Pinta Treponema pallidum infection see Syphilis Tretinoin see Antiacne drugs Trichinella spiralis infection see Trichinosis Trichiniasis see Trichinosis

Trichinosis Definition Trichinosis is a disease caused by a roundworm (nematode) called Trichinella spiralis. An individual worm of this species is called a trichina, from the Greek word meaning “hairlike.” Trichinae can be readily avoided by proper handling and cooking of certain meats, particularly pork products. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Trichinosis

A Trichinella spiralis cyst in striated muscle tissue. T. spiralis cysts can survive up to ten years in this form. (JLM Visuals. Reproduced by permission.)

Description The life cycle of T. spiralis includes several different stages. The adult trichina lives in the intestinal lining of such meat-eating animals as swine, bears, walrus, and rodents. After mating, the male worm dies while the female goes on to produce the offspring. Roundworms have a stage of development called the embryonic stage, which in many species occurs after birth. In trichinae, however, this embryonic stage occurs within the uterus of the female, so that the offspring that are ultimately discharged into the host’s intestinal lining are in the larval second stage of life. These larvae— bout 1500 from each female worm—travel through the circulatory system to the heart, then through the blood vessels leading to striated muscle (the muscle of the skeletal system and the heart). Most larvae that cannot find suitable locations in striated muscle will die. Those larvae that reach striated muscle will grow to a length of about one millimeter, coil themselves, and enclose themselves within a protective wall called a cyst. This process is referred to as encysting. The worms in the cysts can live for up to ten years in this form. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

A pig that has been infected with T. spiralis, then, has thousands of cysts lying dormant within its muscles— the very muscles that humans look forward to consuming in the form of pork chops, ham, barbecued ribs, etc. When humans sit down to a delicious meal of undercooked, trichina-infected pig dinner, they are ingesting T. spiralis cysts. The cyst walls are broken down by the usual process of food digestion in the stomach, allowing the larvae to escape into the new host’s intestines. There the larvae mature to become adult worms, capable of producing a new crop of larvae. When these new larvae hatch, they begin their migration throughout the human host’s bloodstream to his or her muscles, where they live for a short while before encysting.

Causes and symptoms Human hosts who eat meat infested with trichinae may experience symptoms in varying degrees. If the meat ingested has only a few cysts, then the human host’s load of parasites (worm burden) is said to be relatively small, and symptoms will be moderate. In fact, many trichinosis infections are subclinical, which means that the symptoms are so mild that the infection remains undiagnosed. 3385

Trichinosis

In a host with a greater worm burden, the initial symptoms will be caused by the presence of the adult worms in the intestine. These symptoms usually include fever, diarrhea, abdominal pain, and perhaps vomiting. The symptoms begin about one to two days after eating the contaminated meat, and may last for a week or so. When the larvae begin their migration through the blood vessels, the host will begin to experience symptoms that affect the whole body (systemic symptoms), such as fever; swelling of the face and the area around the eyes; rash; bleeding into the nail beds, retina, and whites of the eyes; and cough. In very severe cases of trichinosis, inflammation of the heart muscle (myocarditis), lungs (pneumonitis), or brain (encephalitis) may occur. These symptoms can lead to the few deaths caused by trichinosis. The larvae begin to burrow into the host’s muscles and form cysts within two to three weeks of the initial infection. This encysting produces signs of muscle inflammation (myositis) including swelling of the affected muscle groups, pain, and weakness. The most frequently affected muscles are the muscles outside the eye (extraocular muscles) that control eye movements; the muscles of the jaw, neck, and upper arm (biceps muscle); the muscles of the lower back (lumbar region); and the diaphragm, which is the muscle that separates the abdominal and chest cavities and aids in breathing. The symptoms of trichinosis are at their most severe at about three weeks after infection, and decrease very slowly in their severity. Recovery is extremely gradual, and symptoms may last for as long as three months. Fatigue and muscle pain (myalgia) may take several more months to subside.

Diagnosis An initial diagnosis of trichinosis relies heavily on the presence of its classic symptoms—swelling around the eyes, muscle inflammation, fever, and high levels of a certain type of white blood cell (eosinophils)—coupled with the patient’s history. If the patient reports having eaten undercooked meat from an animal known to be a potential carrier of trichinosis, the doctor may order a muscle biopsy to confirm the diagnosis. By the third or fourth week of infection, muscle biopsies usually indicate the presence of larvae. Stool tests rarely reveal adult worms, although larvae can sometimes be found in blood or duodenal washings after the second week of infection. The blood test that is the most specific for trichinosis is the bentonite flocculation (BF) test. T. spiralis can infect a number of different animal species used for food. The most common food culprit in the United States has been pork sausage, while outbreaks 3386

in Europe have caused by wild boar and horse meat. Outbreaks of trichinosis in Asia and Africa have been traced to dog meat, and outbreaks in Northern Canada have resulted from consumption of walrus and bear meat.

Treatment Supportive care Treatment of trichinosis is primarily aimed at decreasing the severity of the symptoms. Symptomatic relief includes bed rest and medications to relieve fever and muscle pain. The medications most commonly given are aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Steroids such as prednisone (Deltasone, Meticorten) are reserved for the most severe cases of muscle inflammation, or for complicated cases that include myocarditis. Anthelminthic medications In addition to medications for pain relief, trichinosis can be treated with drugs that are called anti-worm medications or anthelminthics. Two related anti-worm medications, mebendazole (Vermox) and thiabendazole (Mintezol), have been reported to be effective against intestinal larvae, but not against larvae encysted in the muscles. In particular, thiabendazole has worked best when given to patients who knew within 24 hours that they had eaten infested meat. Thiabendazole has, however, anti-inflammatory properties that can relieve some of the pain during the muscle stage of trichinosis.

Prognosis The prognosis for recovery from trichinosis is generally good. Most people with the disease are unaware that they have even been infected. It is estimated that between 150,000 and 300,00 people in the United States become infected yearly, so that at any given time, 1.5 million people have T. spiralis infections. Most of these people have such light cases that trichinosis is never identified. Worm burden is measured in larvae per gram of muscle tissue; people with 10 or fewer larvae per gram of muscle tissue usually have no significant symptoms. When the number climbs to 100 larvae per gram of muscle tissue, the symptoms become noticeable. People with over 1000 larvae per gram of muscle tissue are usually extremely ill, and often die. The mortality rate of trichinosis is about 1%.

Prevention Prevention of trichinosis is relatively simple. Swine should be fed only grain or cooked garbage because GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Anthelminthic—A type of medication that is given to destroy or eliminate parasitic worms. Cyst—In the life cycle of the round worm, a protective, walled-off capsule in which the larvae lie dormant.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404) 639-3311. .

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Trichomonas vaginalis infection see Trichomoniasis

Embryonic—In the life cycle of the round worm, a very early life stage occurring within the uterus of the female round worm. Host—The animal within which a parasite lives, and from which the parasite receives its nutrition. Inflammation—A reaction within the body to an invader (virus, bacteria, fungus, worm, etc.) or to tissue injury. The classic signs of inflammation include redness, heat, pain, and loss of function. Larva—In the life cycle of the round worm, the second stage of life, sometimes considered the “adolescent” stage. Nematode—A type of roundworm with a long, unsegmented body, usually parasitic on animals or plants. Striated muscle—Also known as striped muscle; it includes muscles of the skeletal system and of the heart. Trichina—An individual example of Trichinella spiralis.

Trichomoniasis Definition Trichomoniasis refers to an infection of the genital and urinary tract.

Description Trichomoniasis is caused by a protozoan (the smallest, single-celled members of the animal kingdom). Trichomonas vaginalis is passed almost 100% of the time through sexual contact. Trichomoniasis is primarily an infection of women’s vaginal and urinary tracts. A woman is most susceptible to infection just after having completed her menstrual period. Men may carry the organism unknowingly, since infection in men may cause mild or no symptoms.

Causes and symptoms uncooked garbage may contain contaminated pork scraps. Meat from animals prone to trichinosis infection should be cooked or smoked thoroughly until it is no longer pink. Freezing meat at an adequately low temperature (5°F/–15°C for three weeks) can kill most encysted larvae, except for species which infect such arctic mammals as walrus or bear. Resources BOOKS

Plorde, James J. “Trichinella.” In Sherris Medical Microbiology: An Introduction to Infectious Diseases. 3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. Stoffman, Phyllis. The Family Guide to Preventing and Treating 100 Infectious Diseases. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1995. PERIODICALS

Stack, Peter S. “Trichinosis: Still a Public Health Threat.” Postgraduate Medicine 97, no. 6 (June 1995): 137+. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Because trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted disease, it occurs more often in individuals who have multiple sexual partners. The protozoan is passed to an individual by contact within the body fluids of an infected sexual partner. It often occurs simultaneously with other sexually transmitted diseases, especially gonorrhea. In women, the symptoms of trichomoniasis include an unpleasant vaginal odor, and a heavy, frothy, yellow discharge from the vagina. The genital area (vulva) is often very itchy, and there is frequently pain with urination or with sexual intercourse. The labia (lips) of the vagina, the vagina itself, and the cervix (the narrowed, lowest segment of the uterus which extends into the upper part of the vagina) will be bright red and irritated. In men, there are usually no symptoms at all. Occasionally, a man will notice a small amount of yellowish discharge from his penis, usually first thing in the morning. There may be some mild discomfort while urinating. 3387

Trichomoniasis

ORGANIZATIONS

Tricuspid valve insufficiency

Prevention All sexually transmitted diseases can be prevented by using adequate protection during sexual intercourse. Effective forms of protection include male and female condoms. Resources BOOKS

A close up image of Trichomonas vaginalis, the parasite that causes vaginitis in humans. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

Nash, Theodore E., and Peter F. Weller. “Protozoal Intestinal Infections and Trichomoniasis.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. Plorde, James J. “Introduction to Pathogenic Parasites: Pathogenesis and Chemotherapy of Parasitic Diseases.” In Sherris Medical Microbiology: An Introduction to Infectious Diseases. 3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. PERIODICALS

Diagnosis Diagnosis is easily made by taking a sample of the discharge from the women’s vagina, or from the opening of the man’s penis. The sample is put on a slide, and viewed under a microscope. The protozoa, which are able to move about, are easily viewed.

Treatment The usual treatment is a single large dose of metronidazole, or split doses over the course of a week. Sexual partners of an infected individual must all be treated, to prevent the infection being passed back and forth.

Alternative treatment Cure of trichomoniasis may be difficult to achieve with alternative treatments. Some practitioners suggest eliminating sweets and carbohydrates from the diet and supplementing with antioxidants, including vitamins A, C, and E, and zinc. Naturopaths may recommend treatment with two douches (a wash used inside the vagina), alternating one in the morning and one at bedtime. One douche contains the herbs calendula (Calendula officinalis), goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis), and echinacea (Echinacea spp.); the other douche contains plain yogurt. The herbal douche helps to kill the protozoa, while the yogurt reestablishes healthy flora in the vagina. Acidifying the vagina by douching with boric acid or vinegar may also be useful.

Prognosis Prognosis is excellent with appropriate treatment of the patient and all sexual partners. Without treatment, the infection can smolder on for a very long time, and can be passed to all sexual partners. 3388

Policar, Michael S. “Genital Tract Infections: How Best to Treat Trichomoniasis, Bacterial Vaginosis, and Candida Infection.” Consultant 36 (Aug. 1996): 1769+. Walling, Anne D. “Lowest Metronidazole Dose for Trichomonas Vaginitis.” American Family Physician 56 (1 Sept. 1997): 948+.

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Trichotillomania see Alopecia Trichuriasis see Roundworm infections Tricuspid incompetence see Tricuspid valve insufficiency Tricuspid regurgitation see Tricuspid valve insufficiency Tricuspid stenosis see Tricuspid valve stenosis

Tricuspid valve insufficiency Definition Tricuspid valve insufficiency occurs when a tricuspid valve does not close tightly enough to prevent leakage. This condition is also called tricuspid valve regurgitation and tricuspid incompetence.

Description The tricuspid valve is located between the right atrium and the right ventricle of the heart. When the right ventricle contracts, it is supposed to pump blood forward into the lungs. If the tricuspid valve does not close tightGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tricuspid valve insufficiency

KEY TERMS Atrial fibrillation—A rapid, uncoordinated quivering of the upper chamber of the heart. Atrium—The upper chamber of the heart. Pulmonary valve—The valve at the opening from the right ventricle to the artery that leads to the lungs.

ly, some of that blood leaks back into the right atrium. When the atrium receives its usual quantity of blood from veins leading to the heart, plus the leaking blood, the pressure inside the atrium increases. This higher pressure creates resistance to the flow of blood in the veins that enter the atrium from the body. In addition, this increase in pressure causes the right atrium to enlarge over time. Congestion from fluid buildup occurs, particularly in the liver and legs.

Causes and symptoms If a person has serious lung disease or a narrowing of the pulmonary valve, the right ventricle must pump harder to force the blood through the pulmonary valve. In order to pump harder, the right ventricle enlarges and the valve opening stretches, causing the valve to leak. Tricuspid valve insufficiency usually produces such vague symptoms as general weakness and fatigue. As the conditions worsens, a person experiences pain in the upper right part of the abdomen, caused by a congested and enlarged liver. The legs may also swell (edema). An enlarged right atrium can cause atrial fibrillation (the atria flutters, rather than pumping in a regular rhythm) and severe tricuspid regurgitation of blood, which can eventually lead to congestive heart failure.

Diagnosis A leaky valve can be heard with a stethoscope; the sound is called a heart murmur. Additional support for diagnosing tricuspid valve insufficiency comes from a medical history, physical exam, and chest x ray. Further testing with echocardiography, to show an image of the leakage and its severity, is the most helpful diagnostic test for this condition.

This echocardiogram of the heart shows tricuspid valve insufficiency. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

normal people. In certain cases, however, if there is underlying pulmonary valve disease or lung disease, those conditions should be treated. If irregular heart rhythms or heart failure are present, they are usually treated independently of the valve insufficiency. Since a person with known tricuspid valve insufficiency is at risk for infections of the heart, antibiotics should be taken before and after oral or dental surgery, or urologic procedures.

Prognosis Tricuspid valve insufficiency is not usually considered to be serious. If it is the result of other cardiopulmonary disease, the extent of those conditions effect the prognosis.

Prevention In general, tricuspid valve insufficiency cannot be prevented. Resources BOOKS

McGoon, Michael D., ed. Mayo Clinic Heart Book: The Ultimate Guide to Heart Health. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc., 1993. ORGANIZATIONS

Treatment Tricuspid valve insufficiency itself usually does not require treatment, since a tiny leakage occurs in most GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. .

Dorothy Elinor Stonely 3389

Trigeminal neuralgia

Tricuspid valve stenosis Definition Tricuspid valve stenosis is a narrowing or stiffening of the opening in the valve. This stenosis causes increased resistance to blood flow through the valve.

Description The tricuspid valve is located between the right atrium and the right ventricle of the heart. It is the largest of the four valves in the heart. When the tricuspid valve is narrowed or stiffened, it decreases the amount of blood that can flow through it. This decrease raises the pressure in the right atrium and causes the atrium to enlarge. It also causes the right ventricle to shrink, and lowers the cardiac output.

Causes and symptoms Tricuspid valve stenosis is most often the result of rheumatic fever. On rare occasions, it is caused by a tumor or disease of the connective tissue. The rarest cause is a birth defect. A person with tricuspid valve stenosis may experience generalized weakness and fatigue. Many people have palpitations and can feel fluttering in their neck. Over time, there may be pain in the upper right abdomen, due to increased congestion and enlargement of the liver.

KEY TERMS Rheumatic fever—An inflammatory illness that can follow strep throat, and could cause heart damage.

Prognosis Mild tricuspid valve stenosis is not usually considered cause for surgery. The decision to repair or replace the tricuspid valve is often based on the health of the aortic and mitral valves, rather than on the severity of stenosis in the tricuspid valve.

Prevention Rheumatic fever, the usual cause of tricuspid valve stenosis, has almost disappeared in North America and western Europe. Therefore, the number of people who acquired this condition in childhood will decline over time. Resources BOOKS

McGoon, Michael D., ed. Mayo Clinic Heart Book: The Ultimate Guide to Heart Health. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc., 1993. ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. .

Dorothy Elinor Stonely

Diagnosis The noise produced by blood trying to flow through a stenotic valve can be heard with a stethoscope, and is referred to as a murmur. An x ray of the chest will show the right atrium to be enlarged. Further support for this diagnosis is found on an echocardiogram of the heart, which will show an image of the stenotic valve and measure its severity.

Treatment Tricuspid valve stenosis itself usually doesn’t require treatment. However, if there is damage to other valves in the heart as well, then surgical repair or replacement must be considered. Since a person with known tricuspid valve stenosis is at risk for infections of the heart, antibiotics should be taken before and after oral or dental surgery, or urologic procedures. 3390

Tricyclic antidepressants see Antidepressants, tricyclic

Trigeminal neuralgia Definition Trigeminal neuralgia is a disorder of the trigeminal nerve (the fifth cranial nerve) that causes episodes of sharp, stabbing pain in the cheek, lips, gums, or chin on one side of the face.

Description The trigeminal nerve, which is divided into three branches, is responsible for chewing, for producing saliGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Ophthalmic branch

This condition is unusual in those under age 50 and more often occurs after 70. Women are three times more likely to have the condition than are men. When trigeminal neuralgia does occur in younger people, it is often associated with multiple sclerosis.

Maxillary branch

The pain, while brief, is so severe that the sufferer often can’t do anything else while the attack lasts. People with this pain often wince or twitch, which is where trigeminal neuralgia gets its French nickname tic douloureux, meaning “painful twitch.”

Mandibular branch

Causes and symptoms The origin of trigeminal neuralgia is not certain, but scientists believe it may be caused by degeneration, pressure, or irritation of the trigeminal nerve. Some doctors believe the pain may be triggered by pressure from a nearby abnormally-formed artery lying too close to the nerve. Any part of the three branches of the trigeminal nerve may be affected. Neuralgia of the first branch leads to pain around the eyes and over the forehead; the second branch causes pain in the upper lip, nose and cheek; the third branch causes pain on the side of the tongue and lower lip. The first episodes are usually fairly mild and brief, and it may be minutes, hours, or weeks before the next attack. However, attacks tend to occur in clumps that may last for weeks at a time. As the sufferer ages, the episodes become more frequent and painful, until the person begins to live in constant fear of the next one. The momentary bursts of pain usually begin from the same spot on the face each time. The pain can be triggered by touching the area, washing, shaving, eating, drinking, or even talking. Even a cool breeze across the face can set off an attack. Pain is more severe at the ends of the affected nerve, especially over the lip, chin, nostrils, or teeth.

Diagnosis Diagnosis is usually made by eliminating other problems that could cause similar pain in teeth, jaw, head, or sinuses. Because patients with the condition tend to avoid trigger points, avoiding chewing, shaving, touching or washing their faces can be a clue to diagnosis of trigeminal neuralgia.

Treatment It is not easy to treat trigeminal neuralgia. Pain can be suppressed by a range of medicines, including the antiGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Trigeminal neuralgia is a disorder of the trigeminal nerve (which is divided into three branches, as illustrated above) that causes episodes of sharp, stabbing pain in the cheek, lips, gums, or chin on one side of the face. The origin of this disorder is not certain, but scientists believe it may be caused by degeneration, pressure, or irritation of the trigeminal nerve. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

epilepsy medicines carbamazepine (Tegretol) or phenytoin (Dilantin). These drugs slow down the nerve signals at certain nerve terminals, which eases the pain. However, these drugs cause a wide range of side effects, including nausea, dizziness, drowsiness, liver problems, and skin allergies. Some people develop resistance to the drugs or they can’t tolerate the high dosage needed to control the discomfort. If the medicines are stopped, the pain usually returns. If drug treatment fails, surgical treatment to block pain signals from the nerve may be effective. Radio-frequency waves, gamma rays, or glycerol injections can deaden the nerve (and hence the pain). An operation that frees the nerve from whatever is compressing it (blood vessel or tumor) can permanently relieve pain, but this major neurosurgical procedure carries its own risks and complications. Alternatively, a new procedure seeks to place a cushioning sponge between the nerve and a pulsating artery wrapping around it to soothe the irritated nerve.

Prognosis Although the pain is momentarily incapacitating, it’s not life-threatening. As the person ages, the attacks can be expected to occur more and more frequently.

Prevention While the condition itself can’t be prevented, there are a number of things patients can do to avoid triggering attacks: 3391

Trigeminal neuralgia

va and tears, and for sending facial sensations to the brain. When this nerve breaks down for some reason, it can trigger brief but agonizing sizzles of pain on one side of the face.

Trigger finger

KEY TERMS Multiple sclerosis—A progressive disease of the central nervous system in which the coverings of nerves in the brain and spinal cord are destroyed.

of the tendon becomes inflamed (tenosynovitis). The tendon swells because of the constriction, sometimes forming a nodule, and is no longer able to move smoothly through its sheath. As a result, a finger may lock in an upward position as the person tries to straighten it. The condition usually happens in the ring and middle fingers and is more common in women, typically over age 30. In infants and small children, the condition generally occurs in the thumb.

• wash with cotton pads and warm water over the face • rinse the mouth with water after eating, if toothbrushing triggers pain • eat and drink food and beverages at room temperature • chew on the unaffected side • eat soft foods, if eating is becoming a problem Resources BOOKS

Greenberg, David A., et al. Clinical Neurology. 2nd ed. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1993. ORGANIZATIONS

Chronic Pain Outreach. 822 Wycliff Ct., Manassas, VA 22110. (703) 368-7357. National Chronic Pain Outreach Association, Inc. 4922 Hampden Lane, Bethesda, MD 20814. (301) 652-4948. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. P.O. Box 5801, Bethesda, MD 20824. (800) 352-9424. . Trigeminal Neuralgia Association. P.O. Box 785, Barnegat Light, NJ 08006. (609) 361-1014.

Carol A. Turkington

Trigger finger Definition Trigger finger is the popular name of stenosing tenosynovitis, a painful condition in which a finger or thumb locks when it is bent (flexed) or straightened (extended).

Description Tendons are tough, fibrous cords that connect muscles to bones. Tendons must slide easily through their protective coverings (tendon sheaths). The finger and thumb bones have tendons that are responsible for bending and straightening the fingers. Problems start when a tendon sheath narrows (stenosis) and the outer covering 3392

Causes and symptoms Trigger finger is often an overuse injury because of repetitive or frequent movement of the fingers. Trigger finger may happen because a person performs the same manipulation over and over on a job, from squeezing and gripping during a weekend of heavy pruning and gardening, or from such hobbies as playing a musical instrument or crocheting. Trigger finger may also result from trauma or accident. The symptoms of trigger finger are pain in the fingers and “popping” sensations. Sometimes the finger may lock down into the palm or lock out straight. Symptoms are usually worse in the morning and improve during the day.

Diagnosis The diagnosis of trigger finger and thumb is obvious on physical examination. Often there is a click that can be felt as the nodule passes through the sheath. Most cases are uncomplicated although X rays are often taken to rule out other injuries or disease such as arthritis.

Treatment Initial treatment for mild or infrequent symptoms of trigger finger include rest, avoiding or modifying those activities that caused the inflammation, and the use of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) such as ibuprofen. This may relieve the swelling and inflammation that resulted in the constriction of the sheath and the restriction of the tendon. Injection of a steroid medication (cortisone) into the tendon sheath is the next option to treat trigger finger. Depending on the severity, there may be one more injection a week later. Two-thirds of patients improve after one injection. Some physicians will splint the finger in extension after the injection. In severe cases that do not respond to injections and the finger or thumb remains in a locked position, surgery may be required to relieve the symptoms. A local anesthetic is used for the surgical procedure performed on an outpatient basis. An incision is made by a surgeon in the palm of the hand at the base of the affected finger or thumb to relieve the constriction of the tendon. Recovery GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Microcirculation—The passage of blood in the smallest blood vessels of the body, such as the capillaries in the hand and fingers. Myofascial—The fibrous tissue that encloses and separates layers of muscles. Nodule—A swelling or knob that may form on a tendon and make it difficult to slide smoothly through its sheath. Stenosis—Narrowing of a passageway or opening in the body. In trigger finger it is the tendon sheath that narrows. Synovial tendon sheath—Where the tendons cross joints, they are sheathed in thin membranes known as synovium, which provide lubrication to decrease friction.

PERIODICALS

“Ask the Mayo Physician.” HealthOasis Mayo Clinic (May 4, 2000). Phillips, D. F. “New Paradigms Sought to Explain Occupational and Environmental Disease.” JAMA (January 6, 1999). Stroud, R. “Minimally Invasive Surgical Techniques of the Hand and Upper Extremities.” Orthopedic Technology Review (September 2000):18. ORGANIZATIONS

American Society for Surgery of the Hand. 6300 N. River Rd., Suite 600, Rosemont, IL 60018. . OTHER

Jameson DC, CCSP, Timothy J. “Explanation,Treatment, and Prevention of Trigger Finger.”GuitarBase Articles. .

Ruthan Brodsky

Tendon sheath—A membrane covering a tendon. Tenosynovitis—Inflammation of a tendon and its enveloping sheath, usually resulting from overuse injury.

Triglycerides test Definition

may take up to four weeks. Sometimes physical therapy of the hand is required after surgery to regain good use.

Triglycerides test is a blood test to determine the amount of triglycerides, a form of fat, in the blood.

Purpose Alternative treatment Treatment should begin when a person starts having difficulty moving the fingers. If started early, noninvasive measures have a good chance for success. Alternative treatments include acupuncture to facilitate healing and microcirculation, pulsed ultrasound, and myofascial release work for the affected area.

Prognosis At least half of cases can be cured non-surgically. The key to successful treatment is early intervention. A mistake people make is trying to work through the pain. Diabetics have a higher incidence of the condition and are sometimes left with a disability.

Prevention Taking frequent breaks from a repetitive activity will do much to prevent the condition. Depending on the intensity, that may mean a 10 minute break every hour from the repetitive activity. The break should be spent stretching the hands and arms and generally moving around. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The triglycerides test is one of the screening tests for excess lipids (fats) in the blood. It is usually part of an evaluation of risk factors for heart disease.

Description Triglycerides are a form of fat that comes from foods. They can also be made and stored in the body and are used as an energy source. High levels of triglycerides in the blood can mean that there is too much fat in the diet. Hypertriglyceridemia (high levels of triglycerides) is associated with coronary heart disease, especially since elevated triglycerides levels are often associated with unhealthy low levels of hyper-density lipoproteins (the “good” cholesterol), which are necessary for good health.

Preparation For triglycerides testing, blood is drawn from a vein in the arm. A vein at the inside of the elbow or on the back of the hand is usually selected. The area where the needle will be inserted is cleaned with antiseptic. A small needle is inserted through the skin and into the vein, 3393

Triglycerides test

Resources

Tropical spastic paraparesis

allowing a small amount of blood to flow into a collection tube or syringe. Once the blood is collected, the needle is removed from the puncture site. Before the blood test, the patient may be required to refrain from eating food for eight to 12 hours. Patients should not drink alcohol for 24 hours before the test. Some drugs may affect the test and the patient may be asked to cease taking certain medications before the test. Oral contraceptives, estrogen, and cholestyramine (a drug used to treat high cholesterol) can increase triglyceride levels. Ascorbic acid (vitamin C), asparaginase (an enzyme), and various drugs used to treat high blood lipids, can decrease blood triglyceride levels. These substances should not be taken prior to this test.

indicate malnutrition (not enough nutrients in the diet), malabsorption (inadequate absorption of nutrients in the intestinal tract), a diet too low in fat, or an overactive thyroid problem. Resources BOOKS

“Cholesterol and Its Health Hazards.” In The Consumer’s Medical Desk Reference, ed. Charles B. Inlander, et al. New York, NY: Stonesong Press, 1995. “Primary & Secondary Prevention of Ischemic Heart Disease” and “High Blood Triglycerides.” In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1998. 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1997. OTHER

Aftercare After the blood sample has been taken and the needle withdrawn from the puncture site, a cotton ball or gauze pad may be placed over the site and direct pressure applied to reduce bleeding. A piece of surgical tape or gauze adhesive bandage strip may be secured over the site to prevent further bleeding.

Risks There is a very small risk that the puncture site may bleed excessively, a bruise or infection may develop at the site, or it may take several punctures to locate a vein. Some patients may feel faint or lightheaded when blood is drawn.

“Triglyceride levels.” HealthAnswers.com . “Triglycerides.” ThriveOnline. .

Altha Roberts Edgren

Triiodothyronine test see Thyroid function tests Triplets see Multiple pregnancy Trisomy 13 see Patau’s syndrome Trisomy 18 see Edwards’ syndrome Trisomy G syndrome see Down syndrome Trobofloxacin see Fluoroquinolones

Normal results The normal range of triglycerides in the blood depends on the age and gender of the patient. Women naturally have higher levels of triglycerides than men. Pregnancy can also increase triglyceride levels. As people age and gain weight, triglyceride levels generally increase. For adults, a normal level is considered to be less than 200 mg/dl (milligrams per deciliter). Levels from 200–400 mg/dL are considered borderline high.

Abnormal results

Tropical spastic paraparesis Definition Tropical spastic paraparesis (TSP) is an incurable viral infection of the spinal cord that causes weakness in the legs. It is caused by the human T-cell lymphotropic virus-1 (HTLV-1) retrovirus.

Description

Triglyceride levels ranging from 400–1000 mg/dL are considered high and levels greater than 1000 mg/dL are considered very high. High levels of triglycerides may indicate liver disease (cirrhosis), an underactive thyroid problem, uncontrolled diabetes, an infection of the pancreas (pancreatitis), kidney disease, or a diet too low in protein and too high in carbohydrates.

As the name implies, tropical spastic paraparesis usually occurs in tropical locales. Although isolated cases have been diagnosed in the southeastern United States and other places in the United States, TSP is most frequently found in:

Extremely low triglycerides levels (less than 10 mg/dL) can also indicate a problem. Low levels may

• Japan

3394

• the Caribbean • the Seychelles Islands GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS

• western Africa TSP usually affects adults between the ages of 30 and 40, and is far more common in women than in men. The disease may remain undetected for years after infection is contracted. When the immune system’s response to the virus causes nerve damage, the legs gradually lose strength and flexibility.

Causes and symptoms TSP is caused by the HTLV-1 virus, which also causes leukemia. The virus can be spread through the placenta, and also through blood transfusions, breastfeeding, contaminated needles, and sexual contact. Symptoms may begin years after infection. In response to the infection, the body’s immune response may injure nerve tissue, causing symptoms that include bladder abnormalities, leg pain, loss of feeling in the feet, tingling sensations, and unpleasant sensations when the skin is touched. As many as 20% of patients with TSP may also experience:

Retrovirus—A family of RNA viruses containing a reverse transcriptase enzyme which allows the viruses’ genetic information to become part of the genetic information of the host cell upon replication. Virus—A microorganism, smaller than bacteria, which can only replicate within the a cell of a living plant or animal. The virus provides the genetic code and the host cell provides the energy and raw materials for replication.

Prevention The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved screening procedures developed to detect HTLV-1 in donated blood and blood products designated for transfusion. These procedures, which can also be used to diagnose patients with TSP, are designed to prevent the spread of the disease.

• deafness

Resources

• double vision

BOOKS

• the tendency to incorrectly estimate the amount of motion necessary to accomplish a specific task (dysmetria)

Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.

• exaggerated reflexes

“Current Trends Licensure of Screening Tests for Antibody to Human T-Lymphotropic Virus Type I.” Centers for Disease Control. 27 May 1998 .

• facial paralysis • tremor

OTHER

Maureen Haggerty

Diagnosis Infectious disease specialists use blood tests and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spinal cord to diagnose this condition.

Tropical sprue see Malabsorption syndrome

Treatment While the disease is incurable, significant improvement has been reported in the condition of TSP patients treated with corticosteroids. These drugs are believed to alleviate symptoms by suppressing the immune system’s response to the virus that causes them. Plasmapheresis, a dialysis-like procedure in which symptom-producing antibodies are removed from the blood, also provides temporary relief.

Troponins test Definition Troponins are specific proteins found in heart muscle. Troponin testing is done to diagnose heart attacks (myocardial infarctions).

Purpose Prognosis As noted, TSP cannot be cured. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

When heart muscle is damaged, as in a myocardial infarction (MI), troponins leak out of cells and into the 3395

Troponins test

• regions of South America

Troponins test

bloodstream. Increased troponin levels indicate myocardial infarction or injury in a person with chest pain or pressure. Some MIs are silent, manifesting few if any symptoms. If infarction is ruled out in a person with continuing or recurring chest pain (unstable angina), an increased troponin level indicates the person has heart muscle ischemia (a decreased supply of oxygenated blood to the body), and is at an increased risk for a future serious heart event.

Description Although troponins also exist in other muscles, those in the heart are unique, and are measured separately in laboratory tests. Troponins in the heart are called cardiac troponins. There are two main types of cardiac troponins; T and I. T is also referred to as cTnT, while I is also referred to as cTnI. Both troponin T and I are cardiac markers used to diagnose myocardial infarctions. Cardiac markers are substances whose blood levels increase after a myocardial infarction. Others include CK (creatine kinase), myoglobin, and CK-MB (one of three CK isoenzymes). Like all cardiac markers, troponins have a unique diagnostic window (the timeline during which the marker rises, peaks, and returns to normal). Troponin levels rise within four to six hours after the beginning of chest pain or heart damage, and stay elevated for at least one week. This long elevation allows detection of a myocardial infarction that occurred days earlier, but prevents detection of a second infarction if it occurred only days after the first. Troponins I and T are considered superior cardiac markers for several reasons. The most significant is that cardiac troponins are the only markers specific for heart muscle. Other markers also increase following damage to other muscles. Troponin levels help predict the extent of heart muscle damage; higher levels are associated with increased damage, lower levels with less damage. Levels in a healthy person are negligible, so an increase is easily detected. The main difference between troponins I and T is that cardiac troponin I tests measure only cardiac troponin; tests for cardiac troponin T may cross-react with troponin found in other muscles and give positive or increased results in the absence of heart damage. Two types of tests for troponins T and I are available: a traditional quantitative test that provides an actual measurement of troponin, and a newer qualitative test that simply reports the result as positive or negative. The quantitative test takes 45–90 minutes, and helps distin3396

KEY TERMS Angina—A temporary chest pain caused by the heart not receiving enough oxygen. Cardiac marker—A substance in the blood whose levels rises following a myocardial infarction. Myocardial infarction—Commonly known as a heart attack, a myocardial infarction is an episode in which some of the heart’s blood supply is severely cut off or restricted, causing the heart muscle to suffer and die from lack of oxygen.

guish between myocardial infarction and unstable angina. The qualitative test takes 15 minutes and is used in emergency rooms in which rapid patient care decisions can be made based on the presence or absence of troponins.

Preparation Troponins tests require 5 mL of blood. Collection of the sample takes only a few minutes.

Aftercare Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture site or the person may feel dizzy or faint. Pressure to the puncture site until the bleeding stops reduces bruising. Warm packs to the puncture site relieve discomfort.

Normal results People without heart damage have troponin levels less than 0.5 ng/mL.

Abnormal results Levels greater than 2.0 ng/mL indicate a person has had a significant myocardial injury, such as an infarction, and is at an increased risk for future serious heart events. Levels between 0.5 and 2.0 ng/mL indicate a diagnosis of unstable angina, other heart disorders, or chronic kidney failure. Resources BOOKS

Wu, Alan, ed. Cardiac Markers. Washington, DC: American Association of Clinical Chemistry (AACC) Press, 1998. PERIODICALS

Brown, Chris S., and Barry D. Bertolet. “Cardiac Troponin. See Ya Later, CK!” Chest (Jan. 1997): 2-4. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Nancy J. Nordenson

Trypanosoma cruzi infection see Chagas’ disease TSS see Toxic shock syndrome Tsutsugamushi fever see Scrub typhus

Tubal ligation Definition Tubal ligation is a permanent voluntary form of birth control (contraception) in which a woman’s Fallopian tubes are surgically cut or blocked off to prevent pregnancy.

Purpose Tubal ligation is performed in women who definitely want to prevent future pregnancies. It is frequently chosen by women who do not want more children, but who are still sexually active and potentially fertile, and want to be free of the limitations of other types of birth control. Women who should not become pregnant for health concerns or other reasons may also choose this birth control method. Tubal ligation is one of the leading methods of contraception, having been chosen by over 10 million women in the United States—about 15% of women of reproductive age. The typical tubal ligation patient is over age 30, is married, and has had two to three children.

Precautions Tubal ligation should be postponed if the woman is unsure about her decision. While it is sometimes reversible, the procedure should be considered permanent and irreversible. Up to 10% of sterilized women regret having had the surgery, and about 1% seek treatment in attempts to restore fertility.

Description Tubal ligation, or getting one’s “tubes tied,” refers to female sterilization, the surgery that ends a woman’s abilGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

ity to conceive. The operation is performed on the patient’s Fallopian tubes. These tubes, which are about 10 cm long and 0.5 cm in diameter, are found on the upper outer sides of the uterus, and open into the uterus through small channels. It is within the Fallopian tube that fertilization, the joining of the egg and the sperm, takes place. During tubal ligation, the tubes are cut or blocked in order to close off the sperm’s access to the egg. Normally, tubal ligation takes about 20–30 minutes, and is performed under general anesthesia, spinal anesthesia, or local anesthesia with sedation. The surgery can be performed on either hospitalized patients within 24 hours after childbirth or on outpatients. The woman can usually leave the hospital the same day. The most common surgical approaches to tubal ligation include laparoscopy and mini-laparotomy. In a laparoscopic tubal ligation, a long, thin telescope-like surgical instrument called a laparoscope is inserted into the pelvis through a small cut about 1 cm long near the navel. Carbon dioxide gas is pumped in to help move the abdominal wall to give the surgeon easier access to the tubes. Often the surgical instruments are inserted through a second incision near the pubic hair line. An instrument may be placed through the vagina to hold the uterus in place. In a mini-laparotomy, a 3–4 cm incision is made just above the pubic bone or under the navel. A larger incision, or laparotomy, is rarely used today. Tubal ligation can also be performed at the time of a cesarean section. Tubal ligation costs about $2,000 when performed by a private physician, but is less expensive when performed at a family planning clinic. Most insurance plans cover treatment costs. Tubal ligation is performed in several ways: • Electrocoagulation. A heated needle connected to an electrical device is used to cauterize or burn the tubes. Electrocoagulation is the most common method of tubal ligation. • Falope ring. In this technique, an applicator is inserted through an incision above the bladder and a plastic ring is placed around a loop of the tube. • Hulka clip. The surgeon places a plastic clip across a tube held in place by a steel spring. • Silicone rubber bands. A band placed over a tube forms a mechanical block to sperm.

Preparation Preparation for tubal ligation includes patient education and counseling. Before surgery, it is important that the woman understand the permanent nature of tubal ligation, and the risks of anesthesia and surgery. Her med3397

Tubal ligation

Hamm, Christian W., et al. “Emergency Room Triage of Patients With Acute Chest Pain by Means of Rapid Testing for Cardiac Troponin T or Troponin I.” The New England Journal of Medicine (4 Dec. 1997): 67-78. Wong, Shan S. “Strategic Utilization of Cardiac Markers for the Diagnosis of Acute Myocardial Infarction.” Annals of Clinical and Laboratory Science (July 1996): 301-312.

Tubal ligation

Fallopian tubes

Ovary Uterus Cervix

Vagina

Tubal ligation is a permanent form of contraception in which a woman’s Fallopian tubes are surgically cut, cauterized, tied, or blocked to prevent pregnancy. This procedure blocks the pathway sperm takes to fertilize an egg. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

ical history is reviewed, and a physical examination and laboratory testing are performed. The patient is not allowed to eat or drink for several hours before surgery.

Aftercare After surgery, the patient is monitored for several hours before she is allowed to go home. She is instructed on care of the surgical wound, and what signs to watch for, such as fever, nausea, vomiting, faintness, or pain. These signs could indicate that complications have occurred.

mini-laparotomy, as well as a faster recovery period. Minilaparotomy results in a higher incidence of pain, bleeding, bladder injury, and infection compared with laparoscopy. Patients normally feel better after three or four days of rest, and are able to resume sexual activity at that time. Following tubal ligation, there is a low risk (less than 1%) of ectopic pregnancy. Ectopic pregnancy is a condition in which the fertilized egg implants in a place other than the uterus, usually in one of the Fallopian tubes. Ectopic pregnancies are more likely to happen in younger women, and in women whose tubes were ligated by electrocoagulation.

Risks While major complications are uncommon after tubal ligation, there are risks with any surgical procedure. Possible side effects include infection and bleeding. Rarely, death may occur as a complication of general anesthesia if a major blood vessel is cut. The death rate following tubal ligation is about four per 100,000 sterilizations. After laparoscopy, the patient may experience pain in the shoulder area from the carbon dioxide used during surgery, but the technique is associated with less pain than 3398

Normal results After having her tubes ligated, a woman does not need to use any form of birth control to avoid pregnancy. Tubal ligation is almost 100% effective for the prevention of conception. The possibility for treatment failure is very low—fewer than one in 200 women (0.4%) will become pregnant during the first year after sterilization. Failure can happen if the cut ends of the tubes grow back together; if the tube was not completely cut or blocked off; if a GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Contraception—The prevention of the union of the male’s sperm with the female’s egg.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 409 12th Street, S.W., P.O. Box 96920 Planned Parenthood Federation of America, Inc. 810 Seventh Ave., New York, NY,10019. (800) 669-0156. .

Ectopic pregnancy—The implantation of a fertilized egg in a Fallopian tube instead of the uterus.

Mercedes McLaughlin

Electrocoagulation—The coagulation or destruction of tissue through the application of a high-frequency electrical current. Female sterilization—The process of permanently ending a woman’s ability to conceive by tying off or cutting apart the Fallopian tubes. Laparoscopy—Abdominal surgery performed through a laparoscope, which is a thin telescopic instrument inserted through an incision near the navel.

Tube compression of the esophagus and stomach Definition Tube compression of the esophagus and stomach is an emergency procedure used to stop bleeding from the upper digestive tract.

Purpose plastic clip or rubber band is loose or comes off; or if the woman was already pregnant at the time of surgery.

Vomiting blood is both frightening and life-threatening. Among its causes are:

Resources

• bleeding from the nose and throat

BOOKS

MacKay, H. Trent. “Gynecology.” In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1996, ed. Stephen J. McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1995. Moore, J. George. “Contraception and Sterilization.” In Essentials of Obstetrics and Gynecology, ed. Neville F. Hacker, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1992. Pasquale, Samuel A., and Jennifer Cadoff. The Birth Control Book: A Complete Guide to Your Contraceptive Options. New York: Ballantine Books, 1996. PERIODICALS

Andolsek, Kathryn M. “Risk of Ectopic Pregnancy Following Tubal Ligation.” American Family Physician 1 (Oct. 1997): 1460. Apgar, Barbara. “Probability of Pregnancy After Tubal Sterilization.” American Family Physician 15 (Sept. 1996): 1368-1370. Haspel-Siegel, Alyssa S. “Fallopian Tube Anastomosis Procedures to Restore Fertility.” AORN Journal (Jan. 1997): 7582. Hastings, John. “Could I Get Pregnant Even Though I’ve Had My Tubes Tied?” Health, July/Aug. 1996, 30. Peterson, Herbert B., et al. “The Risk of Ectopic Pregnancy After Tubal Sterilization.” New England Journal of Medicine 13 (Mar. 1997): 762-767. Segen, Joseph. “Elective Surgery, Selective Coverage.” Business and Health, 19 Aug. 1997, 48. Walling, Anne D. “Tubal Ligation and Long-Term Probability of Hysterectomy.” American Family Physician 1 (Oct. 1997): 1442-1443. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• peptic ulcers • stomach cancer • esophageal cancer • a tear in the esophagus caused by violent vomiting (Mallory-Weiss syndrome) • breaking of blood vessels in the esophagus The most profuse bleeding comes from veins in the lower esophagus, just above the stomach, that have dilated to enormous dimensions as the result of liver disease. When the liver shrinks due to cirrhosis (scarring from chronic disease), its blood vessels shrink, forcing blood from the intestines to find alternate routes back to the heart. The blood usually flows through tiny veins in the esophagus located just beneath the passageway where food passes downward and vomitus passes upward. Major causes for this rearrangement are alcoholic liver disease, chronic hepatitis, and cholangiitis. Called esophageal varices, the affected veins can be easily damaged and bleed voraciously.

Description One emergency method of stopping bleeding from esophageal varices is to tamponade it with a balloon. The Sengstaken-Blakemore tube is a complex rubber device with two balloons and three channels—one channel for each balloon and one that goes all the way through. The 3399

Tube compression of the esophagus and stomach

ORGANIZATIONS

Tube feedings

Risks

KEY TERMS Cholangiitis—Inflammation of the system of tubes that drains bile from the liver into the intestines. Chronic hepatitis—Long lasting inflammation of the liver due to viruses or other causes. Peptic ulcers—Wounds in the stomach and duodenum caused by stomach acid and the bacterium Helicobacter pylori. Tamponade—To occlude by pressure.

Major complications frequently occur, and death results about 3% of the time. Problems include damage to the esophagus and stomach and interference with the airway. Should the tube remain in place too long, there is danger of the pressure eroding the esophagus or the nose. Resources BOOKS

Henneman, Philip L. “Gastrointestinal bleeding.” In Emergency Medicine, ed. Peter Rosen, et al. St. Louis: Mosby, 1998.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD Minnesota tube has four channels, an extra one that opens above the first balloon. The bottom balloon is round; the upper balloon is long and narrow. The tube is passed through the nose or mouth into the stomach, where the bottom balloon is inflated. Then the tube is pulled back until the bottom balloon comes up against the narrow valve at the top of the stomach, when it can go no further. At this point, the upper balloon is inflated, putting pressure on a length of esophagus where the bleeding veins are located. The tube is then fixed so it cannot be dislodged. The third channel in the tube is used to aspirate (suck out) stomach contents to see if the bleeding has stopped. The fourth channel aspirates from the esophagus. These tubes are a temporary measure. They stabilize the patient until bleeding has stopped, blood transfusions are received, and permanent repair is imminent. Since the lower balloon effectively separates the esophagus from the stomach, it is possible to determine more accurately where the bleeding is located when it is in place. This method of treating upper intestinal bleeding is being replaced by procedures that use a gastroscope, a flexible device that permits viewing and operating without surgery.

Preparation The procedure is explained to the patient and family. A sedative may be given to prepare the patient for the procedure.

Aftercare With the tube in place, the patient cannot eat and may have some difficulty breathing. The patient will be hospitalized until the tube can be removed. 3400

Tube feedings Definition Nutrients, either a special liquid formula or pureed food, are delivered to a patient through a tube directly into the gastrointestinal tract, usually into the stomach or small intestine.

Purpose Tube feeding provides nutrition to patients who are unable or unwilling to eat food. Conditions where tube feeding is considered include protein-energy malnutrition, liver or kidney failure, coma, or in patients who cannot chew or swallow (dysphagia) due to stroke, brain tumor, or head injury. Patients who are receiving radiation therapy or chemotherapy treatments for cancer may also be candidates for tube feedings.

Precautions Certain medications may interact with some formulas to inactivate the nutrients or change the way that the drug is absorbed.

Description A flexible, narrow tube is inserted into some portion of the digestive tract and liquid formulas or liquefied foods are placed into the tube to meet the patient’s nutritional needs. The feeding may be pumped into the tube or allowed to drip into the tube continuously or at scheduled feeding times. A feeding tube can be inserted by a surgical or nonsurgical procedure in several positions along the gastrointestinal tract. The tube may be inserted into the nose GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tube feedings

Enteral feeding container

Enteral feeding pump

8 Fr. feeding tube

Flexible weighted tip

A feeding tube can be inserted by a surgical or nonsurgical procedure in several positions along the gastrointestinal tract to provide nutrition to patients who are unable or unwilling to eat food. The feeding may be pumped into the tube or allowed to drip into the tube continuously, or at scheduled feeding times. The illustration above features a nasojejunal tube which is inserted through the nose and ends in either the duodenum or jejunum. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

and passed down the throat and through the esophagus. A nasogastric tube is inserted through the nose with the end of the tube reaching into the stomach. A nasoduodenal or nasojejunal tube is inserted through the nose and ends in either the duodenum or jejunum, both of which are portions of the small intestine. This type of tube placement is usually used for short-term feeding. Surgical placement of a feeding tube may be done if there will be a long-term need for feeding that bypasses the upper digestive tract. An esophagostomy creates an opening in the esophagus, a gastrostomy creates an opening into the stomach, and a jejunostomy creates an opening into the jejunum. The feeding tube is then inserted through the surgically created opening. Tube feedings can be a mixture of regular foods that are blended with liquid to make a consistency that will pass through the tube. Nutritionally balanced liquid products are often more convenient to use and ensure a balance of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates along with vitamins and minerals. Specialized formulas are also available to meet almost any nutritional need. For example, patients with severe burns, protein-energy malnuGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

trition, or slow wound healing may require formulas that are higher in protein. Patients with renal failure may require low-protein formulas with lower concentrations of minerals and vitamins.

Preparation The reasons that tube feeding is necessary are discussed with the patient, as is the length of time that the feeding tube is expected to be in place. The specific procedure is also explained to the patient.

Aftercare Patients with ostomy feeding tubes may have the tube positioned level with the surrounding skin. A cap or button can be placed over the opening so that it can be more comfortably concealed under clothing. The opening and surrounding tissue need to be cleaned and inspected regularly to prevent infection. For patients with a tube inserted through the nose, daily nasal hygiene is important and the mouth and lips should be kept moist. Good mouth care is necessary for any patient with a feeding tube. 3401

Tuberculin skin test

KEY TERMS Duodenum—The upper portion of the small intestine. It is approximately 10 in (25 cm) long and extends from the stomach to the jejunum.

Howard, Lyn. “Enteral and Parenteral Nutrition Therapy.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. Lagua, R. T., and V. S. Claudio. Nutrition and Diet Therapy Reference Dictionary. 4th ed. New York: Chapman & Hall, 1996.

Jejunum—The middle portion of the small intestine. It is approximately 8 ft (2.5 m) long and extends from the jejunum to the ileum.

Risks Formula from the tube can backup in the esophagus and be breathed into the trachea and lungs, causing aspiration pneumonia. The placement of the tube should be checked frequently and the head of the bed elevated during and after feeding to prevent the solution from moving back up the digestive tract. Feeding tubes can also become clogged and should be flushed regularly with water. If the feeding formula is too concentrated or given too fast, the patient may experience nausea, vomiting, cramping, and bloating. The feeding may need to be diluted with liquid or the rate at which it is given decreased. Diarrhea or constipation can occur if the feeding is not the right composition or does not provide enough liquid. The tube itself can irritate the nasal passage, esophagus, or surrounding tissues.

Normal results A patient may be able to return to a normal diet of solid foods after short-term supplementation with formula through a feeding tube. In cases where long-term nutritional therapy is required, all of the patient’s nutritional needs will have to be provided by the formula. The balance of fluids, calories, proteins, fats, vitamins, and minerals may need to be adjusted periodically.

Abnormal results If formula feedings are not tolerated by the patient or are inadequate to meet his or her nutritional needs, the patient may need to receive nutrition through an intravenous line (parenteral nutrition). This type of therapy involves delivery of sterile nutrient solutions directly into the bloodstream through a needle inserted into a vein. Resources BOOKS

“Enteral Nutrition.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. 3402

Altha Roberts Edgren

Tuberculin skin test Definition Tuberculosis (TB) is an airborne infectious disease caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Besides culturing in the laboratory, the two most common types of tests to screen for exposure to this disease are the Mantoux PPD tuberculin skin test, which is generally considered the most reliable, and the older TB tine test, which is now rarely used. These tests are designed to help identify individuals who may have been infected by the tuberculosis bacteria. A diagnosis of active, infectious tuberculosis is never made solely based on the results of a TB skin test, but requires further testing, including a sputum culture and a chest x-ray.

Purpose Because TB is spread through the air, especially in poorly ventilated areas, it is more commonly found among people living in crowded conditions, such as jails, nursing homes, and homeless shelters. Often, a TB skin test will be given as part of a physical examination when a person is hiring a new employee, particularly for those individuals seeking employment in the health-care or food service professions. People can be exposed to or infected with TB without showing any symptoms or necessarily developing the disease. Individuals with normally functioning immune systems generally prevent the spread of the bacteria by “walling off” or encysting the bacteria within the body. To be at risk for infection a person must have or had close contact with someone who has active tuberculosis (such as a friend or family member). Persons who are more at risk for developing the TB infection overtly include those with a weakened immune system (immunocompromised), either from a chronic disease, such as HIV infection; or as a result of a tissue or organ transplant or other medical treatment designed to suppress the immune system. Symptoms of tuberculosis include a persistent cough, fever, weight loss, night sweats, fatigue, and loss of appetite. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Although the test is generally considered safe, it is important to inform the person conducting the test if the patient may be pregnant, have had a positive TB test in the past, or have had tuberculosis in the past. People who have had a positive TB test in the past will probably always have a positive test and should not be tested again. There are several situations when the TB test results might not be accurate. These include situations involving people who: • have had vaccinations (such as those for measles, polio, rubella or mumps) within the last four weeks • are taking steroids • have severe malnutrition

Description TB skin tests are usually given at a clinic, hospital, or doctor’s office. Sometimes the tests are given at schools or workplaces and may be a pre-employment requirement. Many cities provide free TB skin tests and followup care. The Mantoux PPD tuberculin skin test involves injecting a very small amount of a substance called PPD tuberculin just under the top layer of the skin (intracutaneously). Tuberculin is a mixture of antigens obtained from the culture of M. tuberculosis. Antigens are foreign particles or proteins that stimulate the immune system to produce antibodies. Two different tuberculin preparations are available, Old Tuberculin (OT) and Purified Protein Derivative (PPD). The latter is the preferred testing substance. The test is usually given on the inside of the forearm about halfway between the wrist and the elbow, where a small bubble will form as the tuberculin is injected. The skin test takes just a minute to administer. After 48–72 hours, the test site will be examined by a trained person for evidence of swelling. People who have been exposed to tuberculosis will develop an immune response, causing a slight swelling at the injection site. If there is a lump or swelling, the health care provider will use a ruler to measure the size of the reaction. The other method of TB skin test is called the multiple puncture test or tine test because the small test instrument has several small tines that lightly prick the skin. The small points of the instrument are either coated with dried tuberculin or are used to puncture through a film of liquid tuberculin. The test is read by measuring the size of the largest papule. Because it is not possible to precisely control the amount of tuberculin used in the tine test, a positive test should be verified using the Mantoux GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

test. For this reason, the tine test is not as widely used as the Mantoux test and is considered to be less reliable.

Preparation There is no special preparation needed before a TB skin test. A brief personal history will be taken to determine whether the person has had tuberculosis or a TB test before, has been in close contact with anyone with TB, or has any significant risk factors. Directly before the test, the skin on the arm at the injection site is usually cleaned with an alcohol swab and allowed to air dry.

Aftercare After having a TB skin test, it is extremely important to make sure that the patient keeps the appointment to have the test reaction read. The patient is instructed to keep the test site clean, uncovered, and to not scratch or rub the area. Should severe swelling, itching, or pain occur, or if the patient has trouble breathing, the clinic or health care provider should be contacted immediately.

Risks The risk of an adverse reaction is very low. Occasionally, an individual who has been exposed to the TB bacteria will develop a large reaction in which the arm swells and is uncomfortable. This reaction should disappear in two weeks. A sore might develop where the injection was given, or a fever could occur, but these are extremely rare reactions. It is possible that a person who has TB may receive a negative test result (called a “false negative”) or a person who does not have TB may receive a positive test result (called a “false positive”). If there is some doubt, the test may be repeated or the person may be given a diagnostic test using a chest x ray and/or sputum sample culture test to determine whether the disease is present and/or active in the lungs.

Normal results In people who have not been exposed to TB, there will be little or no swelling at the test site after 48–72 hours. This is a negative test. Negative tests can be interpreted to mean that the person has not been infected with the tuberculosis bacteria or that the person has been infected recently and not enough time has elapsed for the body to react to the skin test. Persons become sensitive between two and ten weeks after the initial infection. As a result, if the person has been in contact with someone with tuberculosis, the test should be repeated in three months. Also, because it may take longer than 72 hours 3403

Tuberculin skin test

Precautions

Tuberculin skin test

for an elderly individual to develop a reaction, it may be useful to repeat the TB skin test after one week to adequately screen these individuals. Immunocompromised persons may be unable to react sufficiently to the Mantoux test, and either a chest x ray or sputum sample may be required.

Abnormal results A reaction of 5 mm of induration (swelling) is considered positive for the following groups: • household contacts of persons with active tuberculosis • AIDS patients • persons with old healed tuberculosis on chest x ray • organ transplant recipients

(cross-reaction), or tuberculosis vaccination with a live, but weakened (attenuated) mycobacterial strain. TB vacination is not done in the US. Cross-reactions are positive reactions that occur as a result of a person’s exposure to other non-tuberculosis bacteria. These tend to be smaller than those caused by M. tuberculosis. There is no reliable way of distinguishing whether a positive TB skin test is due to a previous vaccination against tuberculosis. Generally, however, positive results are not due to vaccination exposure because reactions in vaccinated people tend to be less than 10 mm, and an individual’s sensitivity to tuberculin steadily declines after vaccination. If the skin test is interpreted as positive, a chest x ray will be performed to determine whether the person has active tuberculosis or whether the body has sufficiently handled the infection.

• persons receiving immunosuppressive medications A reaction of 10 mm of induration is considered positive in individuals with one or more of the following risk factors which are either reasons to have a higher exposure to TB and/or a condition that increases the risk for progression to active TB: • foreign-born immigrants from Asia, Africa, or Latin America • injection drug users • residents and employees of such high-risk congregate settings as hospitals and jails • medically underserved low-income populations • TB lab personnel • children younger than four years of age or infants, children or adolescents exposed to adults in high risk categories • residents of long-term care facilities • individuals with certain medical conditions that increase the risk of developing tuberculosis; these medical conditions include being 10% or more below ideal body weight, silicosis, chronic renal failure, diabetes mellitus, high dose corticosteroid or other immunosuppressive therapy, some blood disorders like leukemia and lymphomas, and other cancer Finally, a reaction of 15 mm of induration or greater is considered positive in those with no risk factors and are therefore at the lowest risk of developing TB. A TB skin conversion is defined as an increase of 10 mm or greater of induration within a two year period, regardless of age. A positive reaction to tuberculin may be the result of a previous natural infection with M. tuberculosis, infection with a variety of non-tuberculosis mycobacteria 3404

Resources BOOKS

Faculty Members at the Yale University School of Medicine. “Tuberculin Skin Testing.” In The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests, edited by Barry L. Zaret. New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1997. The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. Edited by Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. “Tuberculosis.” In Diseases, edited by Bryan Bunch. Danbury, CT: Scientific Publishing, Inc., 1997. PERIODICALS

Advisory Council for the Elimination of Tuberculosis. “Screening for Tuberculosis and Tuberculosis Infection in High Risk Populations.” Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report 44 (September 8, 1995):19-34. Pouchot, J., et al. “Reliability of Tuberculin Skin Test Measurement.” Annals of Internal Medicine 126 (February 1, 1997): 210-214. Rose, D. N., et al. “Interpretation of the Tuberculin Skin Test.” Journal of General Internal Medicine 10 (November 1995): 635-642. Steele, Russell W. “Tuberculosis in Children: A Growing Concern.” Infectious Medicine 12, no. 9, (1995): 442, 453. Centers for Disease Control, “Targeted Tuberculin Testing and Treatment of Latent Tuberculosis Infection.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Reporty 49 (RR-6)(2000): 3-4 ORGANIZATION

American Lung Association. 800-LUNG-USA. National Tuberculosis Center. University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey. Executive Office, Suite GB1, 65 Bergen Street, Newark, NJ 07107-3268. (800) 4TB-DOCS. . OTHER

American Family Physician. “Positive Skin Tests for Tuberculosis.” . GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Antibody—A specific protein produced by the immune system in response to a specific foreign protein or particle called an antigen. Antigen—Any foreign particle or protein that causes an immune response. Attenuated—A live but weakened microorganism that can no longer produce disease. Cross-reaction—Positive reactions that occur as a result of a person’s exposure to other non-tuberculosis bacteria. Immunocompromised—A state in which the immune system is suppressed or not functioning properly. Intracutaneous—Into the skin, in this case directly under the top layer of skin. Mantoux or PPD test—Other names for a tuberculin skin test. PPD stands for purified protein derivative. Tuberculin—A mixture of antigens obtained from the cultured bacteria that cause tuberculosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

“Diagnostic Standards and Classification of Tuberculosis.” . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Questions and Answers About TB.” .

Suzanne M. Lutwick, MPH

Tuberculosis Definition Tuberculosis (TB) is a potentially fatal contagious disease that can affect almost any part of the body but is mainly an infection of the lungs. It is caused by a bacterial microorganism, the tubercle bacillus or Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Although TB can be treated, cured, and can be prevented if persons at risk take certain drugs, scientists have never come close to wiping it out. Few diseases have caused so much distressing illness for centuries and claimed so many lives. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Overview Tuberculosis was popularly known as consumption for a long time. Scientists know it as an infection caused by M. tuberculosis. In 1882, the microbiologist Robert Koch discovered the tubercle bacillus, at a time when one of every seven deaths in Europe was caused by TB. Because antibiotics were unknown, the only means of controlling the spread of infection was to isolate patients in private sanitoria or hospitals limited to patients with TB—a practice that continues to this day in many countries. The net effect of this pattern of treatment was to separate the study of tuberculosis from mainstream medicine. Entire organizations were set up to study not only the disease as it affected individual patients, but its impact on the society as a whole. At the turn of the twentieth century more than 80% of the population in the United States were infected before age 20, and tuberculosis was the single most common cause of death. By 1938 there were more than 700 TB hospitals in this country. Tuberculosis spread much more widely in Europe when the industrial revolution began in the late nineteenth century. The disease became widespread somewhat later in the United States, because the movement of the population to large cities made overcrowded housing so common. When streptomycin, the first antibiotic effective against M. tuberculosis, was discovered in the early 1940s, the infection began to come under control. Although other more effective anti-tuberculosis drugs were developed in the following decades, the number of cases of TB in the United States began to rise again in the mid-1980s. This upsurge was in part again a result of overcrowding and unsanitary conditions in the poor areas of large cities, prisons, and homeless shelters. Infected visitors and immigrants to the United States also contributed to the resurgence of TB. An additional factor is the AIDS epidemic. AIDS patients are much more likely to develop tuberculosis because of their weakened immune systems. There still are an estimated 8 to 10 million new cases of TB each year worldwide, causing roughly 3 million deaths. High-risk populations THE ELDERLY. Tuberculosis is more common in elderly persons. More than one-fourth of the nearly 23,000 cases of TB reported in the United States in 1995 developed in people above age 65. Many elderly patients developed the infection some years ago when the disease was more widespread. There are additional reasons for the vulnerability of older people: those living in nursing homes and similar facilities are in close contact with others who may be infected. The aging process itself may

3405

Tuberculosis

Description

Tuberculosis

weaken the body’s immune system, which is then less able to ward off the tubercle bacillus. Finally, bacteria that have lain dormant for some time in elderly persons may be reactivated and cause illness. RACIAL AND ETHNIC GROUPS. TB also is more common in blacks, who are more likely to live under conditions that promote infection. As the end of the century approaches, two-thirds of all cases of TB in the United States affect African Americans, Hispanics, Asians, and persons from the Pacific Islands. Another one-fourth of cases affect persons born outside the United States. As of 1992, the risk of TB was still increasing in all these groups. LIFESTYLE FACTORS. The high risk of TB in AIDS patients extends to those infected by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) who have not yet developed clinical signs of AIDS. Alcoholics and intravenous drug abusers are also at increased risk of contracting tuberculosis. Until the economic and social factors that influence the spread of tubercular infection are remedied, there is no real possibility of completely eliminating the disease.

Causes and symptoms Transmission Tuberculosis spreads by droplet infection. This type of transmission means that when a TB patient exhales, coughs, or sneezes, tiny droplets of fluid containing tubercle bacilli are released into the air. This mist, or aerosol as it is often called, can be taken into the nasal passages and lungs of a susceptible person nearby. Tuberculosis is not, however, highly contagious compared to some other infectious diseases. Only about one in three close contacts of a TB patient, and fewer than 15% of more remote contacts, are likely to become infected. As a rule, close, frequent, or prolonged contact is needed to spread the disease. Of course, if a severely infected patient emits huge numbers of bacilli, the chance of transmitting infection is much greater. Unlike many other infections, TB is not passed on by contact with a patient’s clothing, bed linens, or dishes and cooking utensils. The most important exception is pregnancy. The fetus of an infected mother may contract TB by inhaling or swallowing the bacilli in the amniotic fluid. Progression Once inhaled, tubercle bacilli may reach the small breathing sacs in the lungs (the alveoli), where they are taken up by cells called macrophages. The bacilli multiply within these cells and then spread through the lymph vessels to nearby lymph nodes. Sometimes the bacilli move through blood vessels to distant organs. At this 3406

point they may either remain alive but inactive (quiescent), or they may cause active disease. Actual tissue damage is not caused directly by the tubercle bacillus, but by the reaction of the person’s tissues to its presence. In a matter of weeks the host develops an immune response to the bacillus. Cells attack the bacilli, permit the initial damage to heal, and prevent future disease permanently. Infection does not always mean disease; in fact, it usually does not. At least nine of ten patients who harbor M. tuberculosis do not develop symptoms or physical evidence of active disease, and their x-rays remain negative. They are not contagious; however, they do form a pool of infected patients who may get sick at a later date and then pass on TB to others. It is thought that more than 90% of cases of active tuberculosis come from this pool. In the United States this group numbers 10 to 15 million persons. Whether or not a particular infected person will become ill is impossible to predict with certainty. An estimated 5% of infected persons get sick within 12–24 months of being infected. Another 5% heal initially but, after years or decades, develop active tuberculosis either in the lungs or elsewhere in the body. This form of the disease is called reactivation TB, or post-primary disease. On rare occasions a previously infected person gets sick again after a later exposure to the tubercle bacillus. Pulmonary tuberculosis Pulmonary tuberculosis is TB that affects the lungs. Its initial symptoms are easily confused with those of other diseases. An infected person may at first feel vaguely unwell or develop a cough blamed on smoking or a cold. A small amount of greenish or yellow sputum may be coughed up when the person gets up in the morning. In time, more sputum is produced that is streaked with blood. Persons with pulmonary TB do not run a high fever, but they often have a low-grade one. They may wake up in the night drenched with cold sweat when the fever breaks. The patient often loses interest in food and may lose weight. Chest pain is sometimes present. If the infection allows air to escape from the lungs into the chest cavity (pneumothorax) or if fluid collects in the pleural space (pleural effusion), the patient may have difficulty breathing. If a young adult develops a pleural effusion, the chance of tubercular infection being the cause is very high. The TB bacilli may travel from the lungs to lymph nodes in the sides and back of the neck. Infection in these areas can break through the skin and discharge pus. Before the development of effective antibiotics, many patients became chronically ill with increasingly severe lung symptoms. They lost a great deal of weight and developed a wasted appearance. This outcome is uncommon today—at least where modern treatment methods are available. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Although the lungs are the major site of damage caused by tuberculosis, many other organs and tissues in the body may be affected. The usual progression is for the disease to spread from the lungs to locations outside the lungs (extrapulmonary sites). In some cases, however, the first sign of disease appears outside the lungs. The many tissues or organs that tuberculosis may affect include: • Bones. TB is particularly likely to attack the spine and the ends of the long bones. Children are especially prone to spinal tuberculosis. If not treated, the spinal segments (vertebrae) may collapse and cause paralysis in one or both legs. • Kidneys. Along with the bones, the kidneys are probably the commonest site of extrapulmonary TB. There may, however, be few symptoms even though part of a kidney is destroyed. TB may spread to the bladder. In men, it may spread to the prostate gland and nearby structures. • Female reproductive organs. The ovaries in women may be infected; TB can spread from them to the peritoneum, which is the membrane lining the abdominal cavity. • Abdominal cavity. Tuberculous peritonitis may cause pain ranging from the vague discomfort of stomach cramps to intense pain that may mimic the symptoms of appendicitis. • Joints. Tubercular infection of joints causes a form of arthritis that most often affects the hips and knees. The wrist, hand, and elbow joints also may become painful and inflamed. • Meninges. The meninges are tissues that cover the brain and the spinal cord. Infection of the meninges by the TB bacillus causes tuberculous meningitis, a condition that is most common in young children but is especially dangerous in the elderly. Patients develop headaches, become drowsy, and eventually comatose. Permanent brain damage is the rule unless prompt treatment is given. Some patients with tuberculous meningitis develop a tumor-like brain mass called a tuberculoma that can cause stroke-like symptoms. • Skin, intestines, adrenal glands, and blood vessels. All these parts of the body can be infected by M. tuberculosis. Infection of the wall of the body’s main artery (the aorta), can cause it to rupture with catastrophic results. Tuberculous pericarditis occurs when the membrane surrounding the heart (the pericardium) is infected and fills up with fluid that interferes with the heart’s ability to pump blood. • Miliary tuberculosis. Miliary TB is a life-threatening condition that occurs when large numbers of tubercle GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

bacilli spread throughout the body. Huge numbers of tiny tubercular lesions develop that cause marked weakness and weight loss, severe anemia, and gradual wasting of the body. Diseases similar to tuberculosis There are many forms of mycobacteria other than M. tuberculosis, the tubercle bacillus. Some cause infections that may closely resemble tuberculosis, but they usually do so only when an infected person’s immune system is defective. People who are HIV-positive are a prime example. The most common mycobacteria that infect AIDS patients are a group known as Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC). People infected by MAC are not contagious, but they may develop a serious lung infection that is highly resistant to antibiotics. MAC infections typically start with the patient coughing up mucus. The infection progresses slowly, but eventually blood is brought up and the patient has trouble breathing. In AIDS patients, MAC disease can spread throughout the body, with anemia, diarrhea, and stomach pain as common features. Often these patients die unless their immune system can be strengthened. Other mycobacteria grow in swimming pools and may cause skin infection. Some of them infect wounds and artificial body parts such as a breast implant or mechanical heart valve.

Diagnosis The diagnosis of TB is made on the basis of laboratory test results. The standard test for tuberculosis—which is the so-called tuberculin skin test—detects the presence of infection, not of active TB. Tuberculin is an extract prepared from cultures of M. tuberculosis. It contains substances belonging to the bacillus (antigens) to which an infected person has been sensitized. When tuberculin is injected into the skin of an infected person, the area around the injection becomes hard, swollen, and red within one to three days. Today skin tests utilize a substance called purified protein derivative (PPD) that has a standard chemical composition and is therefore is a good measure of the presence of tubercular infection. The PPD test is also called the Mantoux test. The Mantoux PPD skin test is not, however, 100% accurate; it can produce false positive as well as false negative results. What these terms mean is that some people who have a skin reaction are not infected (false positive) and that some who do not react are in fact infected (false negative). The PPD test is, however, useful as a screener. Anyone who has suspicious findings on a chest x ray, or any condition that makes TB more likely should have a PPD test. In addition, those in close contact with a TB patient and persons who come from a country where TB is common also should be test3407

Tuberculosis

Extrapulmonary tuberculosis

Tuberculosis

F L O R E N C E B . S E I B E RT ( 1 8 9 7 – 1 9 9 1 ) help of her highly supportive parents, and entered Goucher College in Baltimore, where she studied chemistry and zoology. She graduated in 1918, then worked under the direction of one of her chemistry teachers, Jessie E. Minor, at the Chemistry Laboratory of the Hammersley Paper Mill in Garfield, New Jersey. She and her professor, having responded to the call for women to fill positions vacated by men fighting in World War I, coauthored scientific papers on the chemistry of cellulose and wood pulps.

(Library of Congress.)

Florence Barbara Seibert was born on October 6, 1897, in Easton, Pennsylvania, the second of three children. She was the daughter of George Peter Seibert, a rug manufacturer and merchant, and Barbara (Memmert) Seibert. At the age of three she contracted polio. Despite her resultant handicaps, she completed high school, with the

A biochemist who received her Ph.D. from Yale University in 1923, Florence B. Seibert is best known for her research in the biochemistry of tuberculosis. She developed the protein substance used for the tuberculosis skin test. The substance was adopted as the standard in 1941 by the United States and a year later by the World Health Organization. In addition, in the early 1920s, Seibert discovered that the sudden fevers that sometimes occurred during intravenous injections were caused by bacteria in the distilled water that was used to make the protein solutions. She invented a distillation apparatus that prevented contamination. This research had great practical significance later when intravenous blood transfusions became widely used in surgery. Seibert authored or coauthored more than a hundred scientific papers. Her later research involved the study of bacteria associated with certain cancers. Her many honors include five honorary degrees, induction into the National Women’s Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, New York (1990), the Garvan Gold Medal of the American Chemical Society (1942), and the John Elliot Memorial Award of the American Association of Blood Banks (1962).

ed, as should all healthcare personnel and those living in crowded conditions or institutions.

of bacteria, mycobacteria can retain certain dyes even when exposed to acid. This so-called acid-fast property is characteristic of the tubercle bacillus.

Because the symptoms of TB cover a wide range of severity and affected body parts, diagnosis on the basis of external symptoms is not always possible. Often, the first indication of TB is an abnormal chest x-ray or other test result rather than physical discomfort. On a chest x ray, evidence of the disease appears as numerous white, irregular areas against a dark background, or as enlarged lymph nodes. The upper parts of the lungs are most often affected. A PPD test is always done to show whether the patient has been infected by the tubercle bacillus. To verify the test results, the physician obtains a sample of sputum or a tissue sample (biopsy) for culture. Three to five sputum samples should be taken early in the morning. If necessary, sputum for culture can be produced by spraying salt solution into the windpipe. Culturing M. tuberculosis is useful for diagnosis because the bacillus has certain distinctive characteristics. Unlike many other types

Body fluids other than sputum can be used for culture. If TB has invaded the brain or spinal cord, culturing a sample of spinal fluid will make the diagnosis. If TB of the kidneys is suspected because of pus or blood in the urine, culture of the urine may reveal tubercular infection. Infection of the ovaries in women can be detected by placing a tube having a light on its end (a laparoscope) into the area. Samples also may be taken from the liver or bone marrow to detect the tubercle bacillus.

3408

Treatment Supportive care In the past, treatment of TB was primarily supportive. Patients were kept in isolation, encouraged to rest, and fed well. If these measures failed the lung was colGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG)—A vaccine made from a damaged bacillus akin to the tubercle bacillus, which may help prevent serious pulmonary TB and its complications. Mantoux test—Another name for the PPD test. Miliary tuberculosis—The form of TB in which the bacillus spreads through all body tissues and organs, producing many thousands of tiny tubercular lesions. Miliary TB is often fatal unless promptly treated.

a means of treatment designed to allow an infected lung to rest and heal. Pulmonary—Refers to the lungs. Purified protein derivative (PPD)—An extract of tubercle bacilli that is injected into the skin to find out whether a person presently has or has ever had tuberculosis. Resistance—A property of some bacteria that have been exposed to a particular antibiotic and have “learned” how to survive in its presence.

Mycobacteria—A group of bacteria that includes Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the bacterium that causes tuberculosis, and other forms that cause related illnesses.

Sputum—Secretions produced in the infected lung and coughed up. A sign of illness, sputum is routinely used as a specimen for culturing the tubercle bacillus in the laboratory.

Pneumothorax—Air inside the chest cavity, which may cause the lung to collapse. Pneumothorax is both a complication of pulmonary tuberculosis and

Tuberculoma—A tumor-like mass in the brain that sometimes develops as a complication of tuberculous meningitis.

lapsed surgically so that it could “rest” and heal. Today surgical procedures still are used when necessary, but contemporary medicine relies on drug therapy as the mainstay of home care. Given an effective combination of drugs, patients with TB can be treated at home as well as in a sanitorium. Treatment at home does not pose the risk of infecting other household members.

mize the number of pills in the dosage. As of 1998, many patients are given INH and rifampin together for six months, with pyrazinamide added for the first two months. Hospitalization is rarely necessary because many patients are no longer infectious after about two weeks of combination treatment. Follow-up involves monitoring of side effects and monthly sputum tests. Of the five medications, INH is the most frequently used drug for both treatment and prevention.

Drug therapy Most patients with TB can recover if given appropriate medication for a sufficient length of time. Three principles govern modern drug treatment of TB: • Lowering the number of bacilli as quickly as possible. This measure minimizes the risk of transmitting the disease. When sputum cultures become negative, this has been achieved. Conversely, if the sputum remains positive after five to six months, treatment has failed. • Preventing the development of drug resistance. For this reason, at least two different drugs and sometimes three are always given at first. If drug resistance is suspected, at least two different drugs should be tried. • Long-term treatment to prevent relapse. Five drugs are most commonly used today to treat tuberculosis: isoniazid (INH, Laniazid, Nydrazid); rifampin (Rifadin, Rimactane); pyrazinamide (Tebrazid); streptomycin; and ethambutol (Myambutol). The first three drugs may be given in the same capsule to miniGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Surgery Surgical treatment of TB may be used if medications are ineffective. There are three surgical treatments for pulmonary TB: pneumothorax, in which air is introduced into the chest to collapse the lung; thoracoplasty, in which one or more ribs are removed; and removal of a diseased lung, in whole or in part. It is possible for patients to survive with one healthy lung. Spinal TB may result in a severe deformity that can be corrected surgically.

Prognosis The prognosis for recovery from TB is good for most patients, if the disease is diagnosed early and given prompt treatment with appropriate medications on a long-term regimen. Modern surgical methods have a good outcome in most cases in which they are needed. Miliary tuberculosis is still fatal in many cases but is rarely seen today in developed countries. Even in cases 3409

Tuberculosis

KEY TERMS

Tularemia

in which the bacillus proves resistant to all of the commonly used medications for TB, other seldom-used drugs may be tried because the tubercle bacilli have not yet developed resistance to them.

Prevention General measures General measures such as avoidance of overcrowded and unsanitary conditions are also necessary aspects of prevention. Hospital emergency rooms and similar locations can be treated with ultraviolet light, which has an antibacterial effect.

• patients who have an illness or are taking a drug that can suppress the immune system • persons with positive PPD results who have had intestinal surgery; have diabetes or chronic kidney failure; have any type of cancer; or are more than 10% below their ideal body weight • people from countries with high rates of TB who have positive PPD results • people from low-income groups with positive skin test results • persons with a positive PPD reaction who belong to high-risk ethnic groups (African Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, Asians, and Pacific Islanders)

Vaccination Vaccination is one major preventive measure against TB. A vaccine called BCG (Bacillus Calmette-Guérin, named after its French developers) is made from a weakened mycobacterium that infects cattle. Vaccination with BCG does not prevent infection by M. tuberculosis but it does strengthen the immune system of first-time TB patients. As a result, serious complications are less likely to develop. BCG is used more widely in developing countries than in the United States. The effectiveness of vaccination is still being studied; it is not clear whether the vaccine’s effectiveness depends on the population in which it is used or on variations in its formulation. Prophylactic use of isoniazid INH can be given for the prevention as well as the treatment of TB. INH is effective when given daily over a period of 6 to 12 months to people in high-risk categories. INH appears to be most beneficial to persons under the age of 25. Because INH carries the risk of sideeffects (liver inflammation, nerve damage, changes in mood and behavior), it is important to give it only to persons at special risk.

Resources BOOKS

Merck Manual of Medical Information: Home Edition. Ed. Robert Berkow, et al. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. Smolley, Lawrence A., and Debra F. Bryse. Breathe Right Now: A Comprehensive Guide to Understanding and Treating the Most Common Breathing Disorders. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Co., 1998. ORGANIZATIONS

American Lung Association. 1740 Broadway, New York, NY 10019. (800) 586-4872. . OTHER

New York State Department of Health. “Communicable Disease Fact Sheet.” “Pulmonary Medicine.” Healthweb Page. 12 Jan. 1998 .

David A. Cramer, MD

Tubo-ovarian abscesses see Pelvic inflammatory disease

High-risk groups for whom isoniazid prevention may be justified include: • close contacts of TB patients, including health care workers • newly infected patients whose skin test has turned positive in the past two years • anyone who is HIV-positive with a positive PPD skin test; isoniazid may be given even if the PPD results are negative if there is a risk of exposure to active tuberculosis • intravenous drug users, even if they are negative for HIV • persons with positive PPD results and evidence of old disease on the chest x-ray who have never been treated for TB 3410

Tularemia Definition Tularemia is an illness caused by a bacterium. It results in fever, rash, and greatly enlarged lymph nodes.

Description Tularemia infects a variety of wild animals, including rabbits, deer, squirrels, muskrat, and beaver. Humans can acquire the bacterium directly from contact with the blood or body fluids of these animals, from the bite of a GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tularemia occurs most often in the summer months. It is most likely to infect people who come into contact with infected animals, including hunters, furriers, butchers, laboratory workers, game wardens, and veterinarians. In the United States, the vast majority of cases of tularemia occur in the southeastern and Rocky Mountain states.

KEY TERMS Conjunctiva—The lining of the eyelids and the surface of the white part of the eye. Shock—A state in which drastically low blood pressure prevents adequate blood flow to the tissues and organs throughout the body.

Causes and symptoms Five types of illness may occur, depending on where/how the bacteria enter the body: • Ulceroglandular/glandular tularemia. seventy-five to 85% of all cases are of this type. This type is contracted through the bite of an infected tick that has defecated bacterialaden feces in the area of the bite wound. A tender red bump appears in the area of the original wound. Over a few weeks, the bump develops a punched-out center (ulcer). Nearby lymph nodes grow hugely swollen and very tender. The lymph nodes may drain a thick, pus-like material. Other symptoms include fever, chills, and weakness. In adults, the lymph nodes in the groin are most commonly affected; in children, the lymph nodes in the neck. • Oculoglandular tularemia. This type accounts for only about 1% of all cases of tularemia. It occurs when a person’s contaminated hand rubs his or her eye. The lining of the eyelids and the surface of the white of the eye (conjunctiva) becomes red and severely painful, with multiple small yellow bumps and pitted sores (ulcers). Lymph nodes around the ears, under the jaw, or in the neck may swell and become painful. • Oropharyngeal and gastrointestinal tularemia. This type occurs when contaminated meat is undercooked and then eaten, or when water from a contaminated source is drunk. Poor hygiene after skinning and cleaning an animal obtained through hunting can also lead to the bacteria entering through the mouth. Sores in the mouth and throat, as well as abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, ulcers in the intestine, intestinal bleeding, and diarrhea may all occur. • Pulmonary tularemia. This rare type of tularemia occurs when a person inhales a spray of infected fluid, or when the bacteria reach the lungs through the blood circulation. A severe pneumonia follows. • Typhoidal tularemia. This type of tularemia is particularly hard to diagnose, because it occurs without the usual skin manifestations or swelling of lymph glands. Symptoms include continuously high fever, terrible headache, and confusion. The illness may result in a severely low blood pressure, with signs of poor blood flow to the major organs (shock). GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Diagnosis Samples from the skin lesions can be prepared with special stains, to allow identification of the causative bacteria under the microscope. Other tests are available to demonstrate the presence of antibodies (special immune cells that the body produces in response to the presence of specific foreign invaders) which would be increasing over time in an infection with tularemia.

Treatment Streptomycin (given as a shot in a muscle) and gentamicin (given as either a shot in a muscle or through a needle in the vein) are both used to treat tularemia. Other types of antibiotics have been tested, but have often resulted in relatively high rates of relapse (20%).

Prognosis With treatment, death rates from tularemia are under 1%. Without treatment, however, the death rate may reach 30%. The pneumonia and typhoidal types have the worst prognosis without treatment.

Prevention Prevention involves avoiding areas known to harbor ticks and flies, or the appropriate use of insect repellents. Hunters should wear gloves when skinning animals or preparing meat. Others (butchers, game wardens, veterinarians) who work with animals or carcasses should always wear gloves. A vaccine exists, but is usually only given to people at very high risk due to their profession or hobby (veterinarians, laboratory workers, butchers, hunters, game wardens). Resources BOOKS

Jacobs, Richard F. “Tularemia.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. “Some Bacteria Causing Zoonotic Diseases.” In Sherris Medical Microbiology: An Introduction to Infectious Diseases. 3411

Tularemia

tick or fly which has previously fed on the blood of an infected animal, or from contaminated food or water.

Tumor markers

3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. PERIODICALS

Fredericks, David N., and Jack S. Remington. “Tularemia Presenting as Community-Acquired Pneumonia.” Archives of Internal Medicine 56, no. 18 (14 Oct. 1996): 2137+. Schofield, Hal. “Infectious Disease: Leporidae’s Revenge.” Patient Care 30, no. 14 (15 Sept. 1996): 171+. ORGANIZATIONS

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404) 639-3311. .

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Tumor markers Definition Tumor markers are substances, such as proteins, biochemicals, or enzymes, produced by tumor cells or by the body in response to tumor cells. As tumor cells multiply, cancer spreads, and tissue is damaged, these substances increase and leak into the bloodstream. Tumor marker levels in blood help physicians evaluate people for certain types of cancer.

Purpose Tumor marker levels provide evidence about the likelihood of undiagnosed cancer or the status of treated cancer without the expense and discomfort of ultrasound, xray, or biopsy procedures. Tumor marker levels are used to screen for and diagnose cancer, predict a person’s prognosis, monitor treatment, and watch for cancer recurrence.

Description Tumor markers associated with common cancers include: AFP, Beta-HCG, CA 15-3, CA 19-9, CA 27.29, CA 125, CEA, and PSA. Some tumor markers are associated with many types of cancer; others, with as few as one. Some tumor markers are always elevated in specific cancers; others are less predictable. A tumor marker test’s ability to screen for and diagnose a specific type of cancer depends on its sensitivity and specificity. A test that is 100% sensitive has no false negatives. It is positive or increased in every person who has that type of cancer. A test that is 100% specific has no false positives. It is negative or decreased in every person who does not have that type of cancer. Most tumor markers are neither sensitive nor specific enough to screen for or diagnose cancer without the 3412

support of other clinical findings. Increased levels are not found in all people with a specific type of cancer, yet may be found in some people without that type of cancer. In addition, tumor marker levels often do not increase until the person experiences symptoms. Once cancer is diagnosed, tumor marker levels help determine the amount of cancer present. Higher levels usually indicate more advanced cancer and a worse prognosis. The person and his or her physician use this information to choose between more or less aggressive treatments. Monitoring cancer treatment is the most common use of tumor markers. As cancer is reduced, levels decrease. Stable or increasing levels indicate the cancer is not responding to treatment. The choice of tumor marker to use for monitoring is important. Only a marker elevated before treatment can be used to monitor a person during or after treatment. Timing of the tests is also important. Each tumor marker has a unique lifespan in the blood. To monitor a treatment’s success, enough time must have passed for the initial marker to be cleared from the blood. Tests done too soon may be falsely elevated because the marker produced by the untreated cancer is still present. Watching for cancer recurrence is another common reason for tumor marker testing. Periodic testing can detect a recurrence often months earlier than could an ultrasound, x-ray, or physical examination. Tumor marker tests usually are done by combining a sample of blood with a substance containing antibodies to the tumor markers. These antibodies bind to the markers. Another substance is added, often a radioactive substance, to measure the amount of bound marker and antibodies. From this measurement, the amount of tumor marker is calculated. Conclusions based on tumor marker tests are seldom based on one test result but on a series of test results, called serial measurements. A series of increasing or decreasing values is more significant than a single value. Tumor marker testing is currently the object of much research. Their use is directed by approval from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and guidelines established by organizations such as the American Society of Clinical Oncology and the American Cancer Society. Tumor marker test results are available within several days. Insurance coverage for markers still in the research stage for particular uses may vary with the company and individual policy. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) AFP is a protein normally made by only fetal tissue. When certain types of cells become cancerous, they revert GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Pregnant women and people with such noncancerous liver conditions as cirrhosis and hepatitis have moderately increased levels. Beta-subunit human chorionic gonadotropin (Beta-HCG) The beta-subunit of the hormone HCG is a marker for testicular cancer and cancers that begin in placental cells called trophoblasts. Women with choriocarcinoma (a cancer originating in the placenta following pregnancy) or molar pregnancy (a tumor inside the uterus) have increased levels of Beta-HCG, as do 70% of men with testicular cancer. Serial measurements monitor the progress and treatment of these cancers. Cancer antigen 15-3 (CA 15-3) CA 15-3 is produced by cells in the breast. Increased levels are associated with breast cancer. Rarely increased in women with early breast cancer, it is used to detect recurrence of cancer in women following treatment or mastectomy. Cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) CA 19-9 helps diagnose pancreatic cancer when combined with other test results and clinical findings. After diagnosis, levels help predict the success of surgery and to monitor the course of the cancer. Not all people with pancreatic cancer have increased CA 19-9 levels. This marker is associated with a specific blood type. People with pancreatic cancer who are negative for this blood type will not have CA 19-9 in their blood. It is also increased in liver and gastrointestinal cancer and in such noncancerous diseases, as pancreatitis and jaundice. Breast carcinoma-associated antigen (CA 27.29) CA 27.29 is a marker for breast cancer. Eighty percent of women with breast cancer have an increased CA 27.29. Serial measurements monitor treatment response and identify recurrence. Levels may also be increased in noncancerous breast disease and cancers of other tissues. It is not used to screen for breast cancer because women with small or localized breast tumors often have normal CA 27.29 levels. Cancer antigen 125 (CA 125) CA 125 is a protein made by ovarian cells and is a marker for ovarian cancer. Eighty percent of women with GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

ovarian cancer have increased CA 125 levels. Although the test is not sensitive and specific enough to be used for screening, it contributes to a diagnosis when combined with an ultrasound and pelvic examination. After diagnosis and treatment, serial measurements help detect remaining or recurrent cancer. A negative or normal result, however, does not guarantee the absence of cancer. Women may have increased CA 125 levels during menstruation and pregnancy. Increased levels are also found in pelvic inflammatory disease, endometriosis, pancreatitis, liver disease, and non-ovarian cancers. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) CEA is a protein made by fetal tissues, especially liver, intestinal, and pancreatic tissue. It disappears by birth but often reappears when cells from these tissues become cancerous. CEA is most often associated with colorectal cancer, although it is not present in all people with this cancer. Pre-surgery CEA levels help stage the cancer and plan the surgery. After surgery, serial measurements indicate the surgery’s success and watch for early signs of recurrence. When CEA is found in other body fluids, such as spinal fluid, it indicates cancer has spread. CEA levels may be increased in many types of cancer: gastrointestinal, colorectal, liver, lung, pancreatic, liver, prostate, thyroid, and breast. People with such noncancerous conditions as cirrhosis or peptic ulcer, and such inflammatory intestinal conditions as colitis or diverticulitis, also may have increased levels. Prostate specific antigen (PSA) PSA is used to screen for prostate cancer. A protein produced by the prostate gland, increased PSA levels are associated with prostate cancer. Men over the age of 50 years are advised to be screened annually for prostate cancer with a digital rectal exam and a PSA test. Men at high risk for prostate cancer, such as African-Americans or those with a family history, should begin screening at age 40. Once a diagnosis of prostate cancer is made, PSA levels help determine the stage of the cancer, monitor the response to treatment, and watch for recurrence. PSA is also increased in benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), an enlarged prostate condition common in older men. Several calculations of the PSA have been developed to help tell the difference between BPH and prostate cancer: PSA density, PSA velocity, and ratio of free to total. The PSA density calculates the concentration of PSA in the prostate gland. The volume of prostate gland is determined by a procedure called transrectal ultrasound (TRUS). A person with an enlarged prostate, as seen in BPH, has a lower PSA density than a person with prostate 3413

Tumor markers

to a fetal form and begin making AFP. Increased levels are associated most strongly with liver, testicular, and ovarian cancer. Seventy-percent of people with liver cancer have increased AFP levels. Levels indicate the extent of cancer. Serial measurements monitor treatment response.

Tumor markers

KEY TERMS AFP (Alpha-fetoprotein)—A tumor marker associated with liver, testicular, and ovarian cancer.

CEA (Carcinoembryonic antigen)—A tumor marker associated with many cancers, especially liver, intestinal, and pancreatic.

Beta-HCG (Beta-human chorionic gonadotropin)—A tumor marker associated with testicular cancer and tumors, such as choriocarcinoma and molar pregnancies, that begin in placental cells called trophoblasts.

Sensitivity—A test’s ability to detect all cases of a disease.

CA 15-3 (Cancer antigen 15-3)—A tumor marker associated with breast cancer.

Serial measurements—A series of measurements looking for an increase or decrease over time.

CA 19-9 (Cancer antigen 19-9)—A tumor marker associated with pancreatic cancer.

Specificity—A test’s ability to detect only the disease in question.

CA 27.29 (Breast carcinoma-associated antigen)— A tumor marker associated with breast cancer. CA 125 (Cancer antigen 125)—A tumor marker associated with ovarian cancer.

cancer. PSA velocity or rate calculates the change in PSA levels over time. A rapid increase in PSA is more likely due to cancer than BPH. The ratio of free PSA to total PSA also helps distinguish BPH from cancer. PSA exists either in a free state or bound to another substance. The percentage of free PSA is greater in BPH than cancer. PSA levels may increase after ejaculation. Men are recommended to abstain from sexual intercourse or masturbation for 48 hours before the test. PSA levels may also increase after prostate manipulation following the digital rectal exam.

Preparation Tumor marker tests require 5–10 mL of blood. A healthcare worker ties a tourniquet on the person’s upper arm, locates a vein in the inner elbow region, and inserts a needle into that vein. Vacuum action draws the blood through the needle into an attached tube. Collection of the sample takes only a few minutes.

Aftercare Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture site or the person may feel dizzy or faint. Pressure to the puncture site until the bleeding stops reduces bruising. Warm packs to the puncture site relieve discomfort.

Normal results AFP: 3414

PSA (Prostate specific antigen)—A tumor marker associated with prostate cancer.

Tumor markers—Substances, such as proteins, biochemicals, or enzymes, produced by tumor cells or by the body in response to tumor cells. Their levels in the blood help physicians evaluate people for certain kinds of cancer.

• 99% of nonpregnant people have less than 15 ng/mL • 95% have less than 6 ng/mL Beta-HCG: • Males less than 2.5 IU/L • Female less than 5.0 IU/L • Postmenopausal female less than 9.0 IU/L CA 15-3: • females have less than 40 U/mL CA 19-9: • less than 40 U/mL CA 27.29: • less than or equal to 5 ng/mL PSA: • less than 4 ng/mL (PSA levels increase with age)

Abnormal results The meaning of an increased tumor marker level depends on the specific marker, the person’s medical history, and why the test was done. Knowledge of the person’s history, and additional tests and physical examinations are needed to correctly interpret tumor marker test results. Resources BOOKS

American Association of Clinical Chemistry. Tumor Markers: Reclassification, Reimbursement & Recent Advances. Washington, DC: American Association of Clinical Chemistry (AACC) Press, 1997. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tumor removal

Wu, James T. “Diagnosis and Management of Cancer Using Serologic Tumor Markers.” In Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods. 19th ed. Ed. John B. Henry. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Wu, James T., and Robert M. Makamura. Human Circulating Tumor Markers: Current Concepts and Clinical Applications. Chicago: American Society of Clinical Pathologists Press (ASCP) Press, 1997. PERIODICALS

Aziz, Douglas C. “Clinical Use of Tumor Markers Based on Outcome Analysis. CE-Update—Tumor Markers I.” Laboratory Medicine (Nov. 1996): 760-764. Aziz, Douglas C. “Clinical Use of Tumor Markers Based on Outcome Analysis. CE-Update—Tumor Markers II.” Laboratory Medicine (Dec. 1996): 817-821. Coley, Christopher M., et al. “Early Detection of Prostate Cancer. Part I: Prior Probability and Effectiveness of Tests.” Annals of Internal Medicine (Mar. 1997): 394-406. Pamies, Rubens J., and Deborah R. Crawford. “Tumor Markers. An Update.” Medical Clinics of North America (Jan. 1996): 185-199. Vashi, Apoorva R., and Joseph E. Oesterling. “Percent Free Prostate-Specific Antigen: Entering a New Era in the Detection of Prostate Cancer.” Mayo Clinic Proceedings (Apr. 1997): 337-344. ORGANIZATIONS

American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30329-4251. (800) 227-2345. . American Society of Clinical Oncology. 225 Reinekers Lane, Suite 650, Alexandria, VA 22314. (703) 299-0150. . National Cancer Institute. Building 31, Room 10A31, 31 Center Drive, MSC 2580, Bethesda, MD 20892-2580. (800) 422-6237. . OTHER

“Screening for Ovarian Cancer.” National Cancer Institute Page. 11 June 1998 . “Screening for Prostate Cancer.” National Cancer Institute Page. 11 June 1998 .

Nancy J. Nordenson

Tumor removal Definition Tumor removal is a surgical procedure to remove an abnormal growth.

Purpose A tumor can be either benign, like a wart, or malignant, in which case it is a cancer. Benign tumors are well GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

A tumor inside the brain is being removed. (Photograph by Jennifer Watson-Holton, Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

circumscribed and are generally easy to remove completely. In contrast, cancers pose some of the most difficult problems in all of surgery. Currently 40% of all cancers are treated with surgery alone. In 55%, surgery is combined with other treatments—usually radiation therapy or chemotherapy. The doctor needs to decide if surgery should be done at all. Because cancers spread (metastasize) to normal tissues, sometimes at the other end of the body, the ability of surgery to cure must be addressed at the outset. As long as the cancer is localized, the initial presumption is that cure should be attempted by removing it as soon as possible. Non-curative surgery may make other treatments more effective. “Debulking” a cancer—making it smaller—is thought to assist radiation and chemotherapy to get to the remaining pieces of the cancer and be more effective. Another important function surgery performs in cancer treatment is accurately assessing the nature and extent of the cancer. Most cancers cannot be adequately identified without a piece being placed under a microscope. This piece is obtained by surgery. Surgery is also the only way to determine exactly how far the tumor has spread. There are a few standard methods of comparing one cancer to another for the purposes of comparing treatments and estimating outcomes. These methods are called “staging.” The most universal method is the TNM system. • “T” stands for “tumor” and reflects the size of the tumor. • “N” represents the spread of the cancer to lymph nodes, largely determined by those nodes removed at surgery that contain cancer cells. Since cancers spread mostly through the lymph system, this is a useful measure of their ability to disperse. • “M” refers to the metastases, how far they are from the original cancer and how often they have multiplied. 3415

Tumor removal

Benign tumors are generally self-contained and localized and have a well-defined perimeter. They grow slowly, expanding outward from a central mass.

They are dangerous when they compress surrounding tissues. A benign tumor near a blood vessel could restrict the flow of blood; in the abdomen it could impair digestion; in the brain it could cause paralysis.

Malignant tumors are not self-contained, and usually do not compress surrounding tissues. Their growth is an irregular invasion of adjacent cells. Although they may grow slowly, they are also capable of very rapid growth.

They are not localized; in a process called metastasis they shed cells that travel through the bloodstream and infect tissues at other locations. They can even establish malignant growth in a different type of tissue; a breast cancer can spread to bone tissue, for example.

A comparison of benign (top of illustration) and malignant tumor characteristics. (Illustration by Hans & Cassady, Inc.)

Other methods of staging include Duke’s method and similar systems, which add to the above criteria the degree of invasion of the cancer into the surrounding tissues. Staging is particularly important with such lymphomas as Hodgkin’s disease. These cancers may appear in many places in the lymphatic system. Because they are very radiosensitive, radiation treatment is often curative if all the cancer is irradiated. Therefore, it must all be located. Surgery is a common, usually essential, method of performing this staging. If the disease is too widespread, the staging procedure will dictate chemotherapy instead of radiation.

Precautions Curative cancer surgery demands special considerations. There is a danger of spreading or seeding the cancer during the process of removing it. Presuming the cancer cells can grow almost anywhere in the body they end up, the surgeon must not “spill” cells into the operating field 3416

or “knock them loose” into the blood stream. Special techniques called “block resection” and “no touch” are used. Block resection means taking the entire specimen out as a single piece. “No touch” means that only the normal tissue removed with specimen is handled; the cancer itself is never touched. This prevents “squeezing” cancer cells out into the circulation. Further, in this technique pains are taken to clamp off the blood supply first, preventing cells from leaving by that route later in the surgery.

Description Diagnostic biopsies There are four types of biopsy techniques: • Aspiration biopsy. A needle is inserted into the tumor and a sample is withdrawn. • Needle biopsy. A special cutting needle is inserted into the core of the tumor and a core sample is cut out. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• Excisional biopsy. A whole lesion is removed along with surrounding normal tissue. Complete tumor removal Once surgical removal has been decided, an oncologic surgeon will remove the tumor whole, taking with it a large section of the surrounding normal tissue. The healthy tissue is removed to minimize the risk of possible seeding. Cytoreduction When surgical removal of a tumor is unacceptable as a sole treatment, a portion of the tumor is removed to “debulk” the mass. Debulking aids radiation and chemotherapy treatments.

Aftercare Retesting and periodical examinations are necessary to ensure that a tumor has not reformed after total removal.

Risks The possibility of mestastasis and seeding are risks that have to be considered in consultation with an oncologist.

mal individual has a total of 46 chromosomes in each cell, two of which are responsible for determining gender. Normally, females have two X-chromosomes and males have one X and one Y-chromosome. In Turner syndrome, an error occurring very early in development results in an abnormal number and arrangement of chromosomes. Most commonly, an individual with Turner syndrome will be born with 45 chromosomes in each cell rather than 46. The missing chromosome is an X-chromosome. The affected person is always female. The prevalence of Turner syndrome is widely reported as being approximately one per 2,000 live female births although researchers have reported prevalence rates that range from one in 3,125 to one in 5,000 live female births. About 1% to 2% of all female conceptions have a missing X-chromosome. Of these, the majority (99%) spontaneously abort, usually during the first trimester of pregnancy. With ultrasound being used more frequently, researchers have realized that some pregnancies with a missing X-chromosome that progress into the second trimester are associated with nuchal cysts, severe lymphedema, or hydrops fetalis. These pregnancies are associated with a high frequency of fetal death.

Causes and symptoms

Resources BOOKS

Longo, Dan D. “Approach to the Patient with Cancer.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. Morton, Donald M. “Oncology.” In Principles of Surgery, ed. Seymour I. Schwartz. New York: McGraw Hill Inc., 1989.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Turner syndrome Definition Turner syndrome is a chromosomal disorder affecting females wherein one of the two X-chromosomes is defective or completely absent.

Description Chromosomes are structures in the nucleus of every cell in the human body. Chromosomes contain the genetic information necessary to direct the growth and normal functioning of all cells and systems of the body. A norGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Turner’s syndrome is a disorder associated with characteristic defects in the X-chromosome. The most common presentation is a female with a single X-chromosome and an absent X-chromosome. A Greek study from 1999 reported that the intact X-chromosome was as likely to come from the mother as from the father. This means that there is no parental pattern of responsibility for the missing or defective X-chromosome. Another less common genetic pattern for Turner Syndrome (35%) is a mosaic. A Danish study reported that mosaicism has an effect on malformations that are associated with Turner syndrome. Research reported in 1997 noted that the karyotype can have a significant effect on the growth of children with Turner syndrome. The exact location of the genes on the X-chromosome involved in Turner syndrome has not been determined as of 2001. At present, evidence exists that there is a locus for stature on the distal portion of the short arm; there are loci for normal ovarian function on both the short and long arms; and there are loci contributing to fetal viability on the long arm of X. Turner syndrome is characterized by retarded growth that leads to a small stature and frequent infertility. Individuals with Turner syndrome report an increased 3417

Turner syndrome

• Incisional biopsy. A portion of a large tumor is removed, usually before complete tumor removal.

Turner syndrome

Juvenile arthritis, an autoimmune condition, has been recently (1998) associated with Turner syndrome. The prevalence seems to be at least six times greater than would be expected if the two conditions were only randomly associated. Women with Turner syndrome have an elevated prevalence rate of dental caries and such other periodontal conditions as gum disease and plaque. Normal pubertal development and spontaneous menstrual periods do not occur in the majority of children with Turner’ syndrome. It is estimated that 3–8% of girls with a single X-chromosome and 12–21% of females with sex chromosome mosaicism may have normal pubertal development and spontaneous menstrual periods. A few pregnancies have been reported in women with Turner syndrome.

Diagnosis

A low hairline at the back of the neck is one of several characteristics of Turner syndrome. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

incidence of fractures in childhood and osteoporotic fractures in adulthood. The incidence of diabetes mellitus (both insulin dependent and non-insulin dependent varieties) has been reported to be increased in Turner syndrome. Ischemic heart disease, stroke and hypertension are also more common. Growth in children with Turner syndrome is characterized by a slight intrauterine growth retardation, relatively normal growth rates for the first several years of life, a progressive deceleration of growth later in childhood, and the lack of a pubertal growth spurt. Growth patterns of Chinese girls with Turner syndrome parallel those of Caucasians, although their ultimate height is still less than normal. Contrary to earlier reports, most individuals with Turner syndrome are not mentally retarded. They may have some learning disabilities, particularly with regard to spatial perception, visual-motor coordination, and mathematics. As a result, the nonverbal IQ in Turner syndrome tends to be lower than the verbal IQ. Cardiovascular malformations are well-recognized congenital anomalies in Turner syndrome. Dilation and dissection of the aorta are reported in approximately half of women with Turner syndrome. Because of the potential consequences of aortic dilation, some experts recommend screening all individuals with Turner syndrome. However, the specific timing for this screening remains controversial in 2001. 3418

Turner syndrome is diagnosed on the basis of genetic analysis of chromosomes. This can be done prior to birth. However, the predictive value of amniocentesis in diagnosing Turner syndrome varies from 21–67%. There is no significant relation between the mother’s age and risk of Turner’s syndrome.

Treatment Because it is so dangerous, experts suggest screening for aortic dissection, although the specific timing for this screening is controversial. Plastic surgery to correct webbing of the neck should be considered at an early age (before entering school) for girls with Turner syndrome. Most individuals with Turner syndrome require female hormone therapy to promote development of secondary sexual characteristics and menstruation. The time of beginning therapy varies with individuals. Experts recommend that therapy begin when a woman expresses concern about her onset of puberty. All women receiving long-term, exogenous female hormone therapy require periodic gynecological examinations, because those with Turner syndrome have an increased risk of developing neoplasms such as gonadoblastoma and dysgerminoma, which arise from their rudimentary streak gonads.

Prognosis Most women with Turner syndrome can live relatively normal lives. The prognosis for a person with Turner syndrome is dependent on other conditions that may be present. Care must be taken to regularly monitor them for the health problems that are associated with Turner syndrome. For example, heart or kidney defects, GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Resources BOOKS

Hall, Judith G. “Chromosomal Clinical Abnormalities.” In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, edited by Richard E Behrman, et al. 16th ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2000, pp. 325334. Jones, K.L. “XO Syndrome.” In Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, edited by Kenneth L. Jones and Judy Fletcher. 5th ed. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1997, pp 81-87. Plumridge, D. Good Things Come in Small Packages: The Whys and Hows of Turner Syndrome. Portland, OR: University of Oregon Health Sciences Center, 1987. Reiser, P.A., and L.E. Underwood. Turner Syndrome: A Guide for Families. Wayzata, MN: Turner Syndrome Society; 1992. PERIODICALS

Gravholt, C.H., et al. “Morbidity in Turner Syndrome.” Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 51, no. 2 (February 1998): 147158. Gravholt, C.H., et al. “Prenatal and Postnatal Prevalence of Turner’s Syndrome: A Registry Study.” British Medical Journal 312, no. 7022 (January 6, 1996): 16-21. Zinn, A.R., D.C. Page, and E.M. Fisher. “Turner Syndrome: The Case of the Missing Sex Chromosome.” Trends in Genetics 9 (1993): 90-93. ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Pediatrics. 141 Northwest Point Blvd., Elk Grove Village, IL 60007-1098. (847) 434-4000. Fax: (847) 434-8000. . Endocrine Society. 4350 East West Highway, Suite 500, Bethesda, MD 20814-4410. (301) 941-0200. Fax: (301) 941-0259. endostaff@endo-society.org. Human Growth Foundation. 997 Glen Cove Ave., Glen Head, NY 11545. (800) 451-6434. Fax: (516) 671-4055. . MAGIC Foundation for Children’s Growth. 1327 N. Harlem Ave., Oak Park, IL 60302. (708) 383-0808 or (800) 3624423. Fax: (708) 383-0899. <mary@magicfoundation. org>. . Turner Syndrome Society of Canada. 7777 Keele St, Floor 2, Concord, ONT L4K 1Y7. Canada (800) 465-6744 or (416) 660-7766. Fax: (416) 660-7450. Turner Syndrome Society of England. 2 Mayfield Ave., London, W41PW. UK 44 (0)181-994 7625. Fax: 44 (0)181995 9075. or . GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Chromosome—A microscopic thread-like structure found within each cell of the body that consists of a complex of proteins and DNA. Humans have 46 chromosomes arranged into 23 pairs. Changes in either the total number of chromosomes or their shape and size (structure) may lead to physical or mental abnormalities. Mosaic—A term referring to a genetic situation in which an individual’s cells do not have the exact same composition of chromosomes. In Down syndrome, this may mean that some of the individual’s cells have a normal 46 chromosomes, while other cells have an abnormal 47 chromosomes. Ovary—The female reproductive organ that produces the reproductive cell (ovum) and female hormones. Zygote—The cell formed by the uniting of egg and sperm.

Turner Syndrome Society of the United States. 14450 T. C. Jester, Suite 260, Houston, TX 77014. (800) 365-9944 or (832) 249-9988. Fax: (832) 249-9987. . . OTHER

American Academy of Pediatrics. . On-ramp Access. . Turner Syndrome Support Society(UK). . University of Kansas Medical Center. .

L. Fleming Fallon, Jr., MD, PhD, DrPH

Twins see Multiple pregnancy

2,3-diphosphoglycerate test Definition 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) is a substance made in the red blood cells. It controls the movement of oxygen from red blood cells to body tissues. 2,3-DPG testing is done to help investigate both a deficiency in red blood cells (anemia) and an unexplained increase of red blood cells, called erythrocytosis. 3419

2,3-diphosphoglycerate test

hearing loss, or the development of inflammatory bowel disease may significantly impact the quality of life. Without these types of conditions, however, their life expectancy is normal. Support will be necessary to help an adolescent girl cope with body image issues and to help some women accept the fact that they will never be able to have children.

2,3-diphosphoglycerate test

Purpose Hemoglobin, the protein in the blood that carries oxygen, uses 2,3-DPG to control how much oxygen is released once the blood gets out into the tissues. The more 2,3-DPG in the cell, the more oxygen is delivered to body tissues. Conversely, the less 2,3-DPG in the cell, the less oxygen is delivered. Increasing the amount of 2,3-DPG is the body’s primary way of responding to a lack of oxygen. Anemia, obstructive lung disease, cystic fibrosis, and congenital heart disease are all accompanied by increases in 2,3-DPG. When more oxygen is required because of increased metabolism, such as in hyperthyroidism, more 2,3-DPG is produced. Decreased 2,3-DPG results from an inherited lack of the red blood cell enzymes 2,3-DPG mutase and 2,3-DPG phosphatase. These enzymes are needed to make 2,3DPG. Without 2,3-DPG to control the movement of oxygen to its tissues, the body responds by making more red blood cells, a condition called erythrocytosis. The outside membrane of the cell is weakened, causing it to have an irregular shape and burst, or hemolyze, easily. This condition is called nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. 2,3-DPG levels are important in large blood transfusions, because stored blood quickly loses 2,3-DPG and its ability to deliver oxygen. After transfusion, the red cells rebuild the 2,3-DPG, but it takes about 24 hours to regain a normal level of 2,3-DPG and hemoglobin function.

Description In the laboratory, a person’s serum is mixed with a substance that will react with 2,3-DPG. The end product of this reaction is measured; and from that measurement, the amount of 2,3-DPG in the person’s serum is determined. Results are usually available the next day.

Preparation This test requires drawing 5-10 mL of blood. The patient should not exercise before having the blood drawn. Exercise increases the body’s need for oxygen and could cause a temporary increase in levels of 2,3-DPG.

Aftercare Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture site, or the person may feel dizzy or faint. Pressure to the puncture site until the bleeding stops will reduce bruising. Warm packs to the puncture site will relieve discomfort.

Normal results Normal results will vary based on the laboratory and testing methods used. 3420

KEY TERMS Anemia—A reduction in the number of erythrocytes or red blood cells. Erythrocytes are necessary to form hemoglobin for transporting oxygen. Erythrocytosis—Increased production of red blood cells. Hemoglobin—A protein within the red blood cell that carries oxygen. Nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia—Anemia caused by variably shaped red blood cells that burst, or hemolyze, easily.

Abnormal results Decreased levels of 2,3-DPG are found in cases of erythrocytosis and nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia caused by 2,3-DPG mutase and 2,3-DPG phosphatase deficiencies. Lower levels are also commonly found after large blood transfusions. Increased levels of 2,3-DPG are found in conditions in which the body needs more oxygen, such as anemia, obstructive lung disease, cystic fibrosis, congenital heart disease, and hyperthyroidism. High altitudes and participating in exercise sessions before the test can also give false high values. Resources BOOKS

Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods. 19th ed. Ed. John B. Henry. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Pagana, Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1998. Widmann’s Clinical Interpretation of Laboratory Tests. 10th ed. Ed. Ronald A. Sacher, et al. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis Co., 1991. PERIODICALS

Hsia, Connie C. W. “Respiratory Function of Hemoglobin.” New England Journal of Medicine 338 (Jan. 1998): 239-247.

Nancy J. Nordenson

2,3-DPG see 2,3-diphosphoglycerate test Tylenol see Acetaminophen Tympanic membrane perforation see Perforated eardrum Tympanometry see Audiometry GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Typhoid fever

Typhoid fever Definition Typhoid fever is a severe infection caused by a bacterium, Salmonella typhi. S. typhi is in the same family of bacteria as the type spread by chicken and eggs, commonly known as “salmonella poisoning,” or food poisoning. S. typhi bacteria do not have vomiting and diarrhea as the most prominent symptoms of their presence in humans. Instead, persistently high fever is the hallmark of S. typhi infection.

Description S. typhi bacteria are passed into the stool and urine of infected patients. They may continue to be present in the stool of asymptomatic carriers, who are persons who have recovered from the symptoms of the disease but continue to carry the bacteria. This carrier state occurs in about 3% of all individuals recovered from typhoid fever. Typhoid fever is passed from person to person through poor hygiene, such as incomplete or no hand washing after using the toilet. Persons who are carriers of the disease and who handle food can be the source of epidemic spread of typhoid. One such individual gave her name to the expression “Typhoid Mary,” a name given to someone whom others avoid. Typhoid fever is a particularly difficult problem in parts of the world with poor sanitation practices. In the United States, most patients who contract typhoid fever have recently returned from travel to another country where typhoid is much more common, including Mexico, Peru, Chile, India, and Pakistan.

Causes and symptoms S. typhi must be ingested to cause disease. Transmission often occurs when a person in the carrier state does not wash hands thoroughly (or not at all) after defecation and serves food to others. This pathway is sometimes called the fecal-oral route of disease transmission. In countries where open sewage is accessible to flies, the insects land on the sewage, pick up the bacteria, and then contaminate food to be eaten by humans. After being swallowed, the S. typhi bacteria head down the digestive tract, where they are taken in by cells called mononuclear phagocytes. These phagocytes are cells of the immune system, whose job it is to engulf and kill invading bacteria and viruses. In the case of S. typhi, however, the bacteria are able to survive ingestion by the phagocytes, and multiply within these cells. This period of time, during which the bacteria are multiplying within GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) scan of Salmonella typhi, the bacteria which causes typhoid fever in humans. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

the phagocytes, is the 10- to 14-day incubation period of typhoid fever. When huge numbers of bacteria fill an individual phagocyte, they spill out of the cell and into the bloodstream, where their presence begins to cause symptoms. The presence of increasingly large numbers of bacteria in the bloodstream (bacteremia) is responsible for an increasingly high fever, which lasts throughout the four to eight weeks of the disease in untreated individuals. Other symptoms of typhoid fever include constipation (at first), extreme fatigue, headache, joint pain, and a rash across the abdomen known as rose spots. The bacteria move from the bloodstream into certain tissues of the body, including the gallbladder and lymph tissue of the intestine (called Peyer’s patches). The tissue’s response to this invasion causes symptoms ranging from inflammation of the gallbladder (cholecystitis) to intestinal bleeding to actual perforation of the intestine. Perforation of the intestine refers to an actual hole occurring in the wall of the intestine, with leakage of intestinal contents into the abdominal cavity. This leakage causes severe irritation and inflammation of the lining of the abdominal cavity, which is called peritonitis. Peritonitis is a frequent cause of death from typhoid fever. Other complications of typhoid fever include liver and spleen enlargement, sometimes so great that the spleen ruptures or bursts; anemia, or low red blood cell count due to blood loss from the intestinal bleeding; joint infections, which are especially common in 3421

Typhoid fever

patients with sickle cell anemia and immune system disorders; pneumonia caused by a bacterial infection— usually Streptococcus pneumoniae— which is able to take hold due to the patient’s weakened state; heart infections; and meningitis and infections of the brain, which cause mental confusion and even coma. It may take a patient several months to recover fully from untreated typhoid fever.

Diagnosis In some cases, the doctor may suspect the diagnosis if the patient has already developed the characteristic rose spots, or if he or she has a history of recent travel in areas with poor sanitation. The diagnosis, however, is confirmed by a blood culture. Samples of a patient’s stool, urine, and bone marrow can also be used to grow S. typhi in a laboratory for identification under a microscope. Cultures are the most accurate method of diagnosis. Blood cultures usually become positive in the first week of illness in 80% of patients who have not taken antibiotics.

KEY TERMS Asymptomatic—A state in which a person experiences no symptoms of a disease. Bacteremia—Bacteria in the blood. Carrier—A person who has a particular disease agent present within his/her body, and can pass this agent on to others, but who displays no symptoms of infection. Epidemic—A large number of cases of the same disease or infection all occurring within a short time period in a specific location. Mononuclear phagocyte—A type of cell of the human immune system that ingests bacteria, viruses, and other foreign matter, thus removing potentially harmful substances from the bloodstream. These substances are usually then digested within the phagocyte. Rose spots—A pinkish rash across the trunk or abdomen that is a classic sign of typhoid fever.

Treatment Antibiotics are the treatment of choice for typhoid fever. Chloramphenicol (Chloromycetin) is the most effective medication for S. typhi . The patient’s symptoms begin to improve slightly after only 24-48 hours of receiving the medication. Another drug, ceftriaxone (Rocephin), has been used as well, and is also extremely effective. It lowers fever fairly quickly. Carriers of S. typhi must be treated even when they do not show any symptoms of the infection, because carriers are responsible for the majority of new cases of typhoid fever. Eliminating the carrier state is actually a fairly difficult task. It requires treatment with one or even two different medications over a period of four to six weeks. In the case of a carrier with gallstones, surgery may need to be performed to remove the gallbladder. This measure is necessary because typhoid bacteria are often housed in the gallbladder, where they may survive in spite of antibiotic treatment.

Prognosis The prognosis for recovery is good for most patients. In the era before effective antibiotics were discovered, about 12% of all typhoid fever patients died of the infection. Now, however, fewer than 1% of patients who receive prompt antibiotic treatment will die. The mortality rate is highest in the very young and very old, and in patients suffering from malnutrition. The most ominous signs are changes in a patient’s state of consciousness, including stupor or coma. 3422

Prevention Hygienic sewage disposal systems in a community as well as proper personal hygiene are the most important factors in preventing typhoid fever. Immunizations are available for travelers who expect to visit countries where S. typhi is a known public health problem. Some of these immunizations provide only short-term protection (for a few months), while others may be effective for several years. Efforts are being made to develop immunizations that provide a longer period of protection with fewer side effects from the vaccine itself. Resources BOOKS

“Salmonellosis.” In Sherris Medical Microbiology: An Introduction to Infectious Diseases. 3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. Stoffman, Phyllis. The Family Guide to Preventing and Treating 100 Infectious Diseases. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1995. PERIODICALS

Zenilman, J. M. “Typhoid Fever.” Journal of the American Medical Association (10 Sept. 1997): 847+. ORGANIZATIONS

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404) 639-3311. .

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Definition Several different illnesses called “typhus” exist, all of them caused by one of the bacteria in the family Rickettsiae. Each illness occurs when the bacteria is passed to a human through contact with an infected insect.

Description The four main types of typhus are: • epidemic typhus • Brill-Zinsser disease • endemic or murine typhus • scrub typhus These diseases are all somewhat similar, although they vary in terms of severity. The specific type of Rickettsia that causes the disease also varies, as does the specific insect that can pass the bacteria along. Epidemic typhus is caused by Rickettsia prowazekii, which is carried by body lice. When the lice feed on a human, they may simultaneously defecate. When the person scratches the bite, the feces (which carry the bacteria) are scratched into the wound. Body lice are common in areas in which people live in overcrowded, dirty conditions, with few opportunities to wash themselves or their clothing. Because of this fact, this form of typhus occurs simultaneously in large numbers of individuals living within the same community; that is, in epidemics. This type of typhus occurs when cold weather, poverty, war, and other disasters result in close living conditions that encourage the maintenance of a population of lice living among humans. Epidemic typhus is now found in the mountainous regions of Africa, South America, and Asia. Brill-Zinsser disease is a reactivation of an earlier infection with epidemic typhus. It affects people years after they have completely recovered from epidemic typhus. When something causes a weakening of their immune system (like aging, surgery, illness), the bacteria can gain hold again, causing illness. This illness tends to be extremely mild. Endemic typhus is carried by fleas. When a flea lands on a human, it may defecate as it feeds. When the person scratches the itchy spot where the flea was feeding, the bacteria-laden feces are scratched into the skin, thus causing infection. The causative bacteria is called Rickettsia typhi. Endemic typhus occurs most commonly in warm, coastal regions. In the United States, southern Texas and southern California have the largest number of cases. Scrub typhus is caused by Rickettsia tsutsugamushi. This bacteria is carried by mites or chiggers. As the mites GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Causes and symptoms The four types of typhus cause similar types of illnesses, though varying in severity. Epidemic typhus causes fever, headache, weakness, and muscle aches. It also causes a rash composed of both spots and bumps. The rash starts on the back, chest, and abdomen, then spreads to the arms and legs. The worst types of complications involve swelling in the heart muscle or brain (encephalitis). Without treatment, this type of typhus can be fatal. Brill-Zinsser disease is quite mild, resulting in about a week-long fever, and a light rash similar to that of the original illness. Endemic typhus causes about 12 days of high fever, with chills and headache. A light rash may occur. Scrub typhus causes a wide variety of effects. The main symptoms include fever, headache, muscle aches and pains, cough, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting, and diarrhea. Some patients experience only these symptoms. Some patients develop a rash, which can be flat or bumpy. The individual spots eventually develop crusty black scabs. Other patients go on to develop a more serious disease, in which encephalitis, pneumonia, and swelling of the liver and spleen (hepatosplenomegaly) occur.

Diagnosis A number of tests exist that can determine the reactions of a patient’s antibodies (immune cells in the blood) to the presence of certain viral and bacterial markers. When the antibodies react in a particular way, it suggests the presence of a rickettsial infection. Many tests require a fair amount of time for processing, so practitioners will frequently begin treatment without completing tests, simply on the basis of a patient’s symptoms.

Treatment The antibiotics tetracycline or chloramphenicol are used for treatment of each of the forms of typhus.

Prognosis The prognosis depends on what types of complications an individual patient experiences. While children usually recover well from epidemic typhus, older adults 3423

Typhus

Typhus

feed on humans, they deposit the bacteria. Scrub typhus occurs commonly in the southwest Pacific, southeast Asia, and Japan. It is a very common cause of illness in people living in or visiting these areas. It occurs more commonly during the wet season.

Tzanck preparation

Purpose

KEY TERMS Antibody—Specialized cells of the immune system, which can recognize organisms that invade the body (such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi). The antibodies are then able to set off a complex chain of events designed to kill these foreign invaders. Endemic—Occurring naturally and consistently in a particular area. Epidemic—A large cluster of cases all occurring at about the same time within a specific community or region.

may have as much as a 60% death rate without treatment. Brill-Zinsser, on the other hand, carries no threat of death. People usually recover uneventfully from endemic typhus, although the elderly, those with other medical problems, or people mistakenly treated with sulfa drugs may have a 1% death rate from the illness. Scrub typhus responds well to appropriate treatment, but untreated patients have a death rate of about 7%.

Prevention Prevention for each of these forms of typhus includes avoidance of the insects that carry the causative bacteria. Other preventive measures include good hygiene and the use of insect repellents. Resources BOOKS

Walker, David, et al. “Rickettsial Diseases.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. ORGANIZATIONS

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404) 639-3311. .

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Tzanck preparation

Herpesviruses are responsible for several superficial infections. Varicella zoster virus causes chickenpox and shingles, herpes simplex type 1 causes the common cold sore or fever blister, and herpes simplex type 2 causes the sexually transmitted disease genital herpes. They are all characterized by blisters and ulcers. Physicians usually can diagnose herpes infections simply by looking at the type of blisters and ulcers, and their distribution on the person’s body. Sometimes laboratory evidence of herpes is needed to confirm the diagnosis. For example, herpes can be devastating to a newborn baby or a person with a weakened immune system. Treatment can begin once herpes is confirmed in a laboring mother’s genital ulcers or in the skin blisters of an immunocompromised person. A lab tries to grow (culture) the virus that may be present in the blister. This lab test takes several days to complete, but the Tzanck preparation takes minutes.

Description The Tzanck preparation is done by smearing cells taken from a fresh blister or ulcer onto a microscope slide. The cells are stained with a special stain, such as Wright’s stain, and then examined under a microscope for characteristic changes caused by a herpesvirus. Herpes causes giant cells with multiple nuclei. The shape of each nucleus appears molded to fit together with those adjacent. The background of the cell looks like ground glass and contains small dark spots called inclusion bodies. Tzanck preparation is also called a Tzanck smear, herpes stain for inclusion bodies, or inclusion bodies stain. Results are available the same or following day, often within minutes.

Preparation A fresh blister is opened with a scalpel or sterile needle. The physician scrapes the base of the blister with the scalpel, gathers as much cellular material as possible, and gently spreads it on a microscope slide.

Normal results A normal smear shows no evidence of a herpes infection. This test may also have false negatives. Studies have shown that the Tzanck preparation shows signs of infection in only 50–79% of people with a herpes infection. A negative Tzanck preparation may have to be confirmed by a herpes culture.

Definition Tzanck preparation is a rapid test done to diagnose infections caused by herpesviruses. Cells are examined under a microscope for signs of infection. 3424

Abnormal results A smear that shows evidence of herpes infection does not distinguish between the various infections GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Tzanck preparation

caused by herpes virus. The physician uses the person’s symptoms and other clinical findings to distinguish between these infections. In certain cases, the physician will follow a positive Tzanck smear with a culture for confirmation. Resources BOOKS

Henry, John B., ed. Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods. 19th ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Isada, Carlos M., et al. Infectious Diseases Handbook. Hudson: Lexi-Comp Inc., 1995.

Nancy J. Nordenson

Tzanck smear see Tzanck preparation

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

3425

U • perforated and overflowed into the abdomen

Ulcer surgery

• scarred or swelled so much that the bowel is obstructed • acute bleeding

Definition

• defied all other types of treatment

Ulcer surgery is a procedure used to cure peptic ulcer disease when medications have failed.

Purpose Ulcer surgery is used to relieve a present peptic ulcer disease and to prevent recurrence of it. Surgery is usually required if the ulcer is in one of the following states:

The need for ulcer surgery has diminished greatly over the past 20–30 years due to the discovery of two new classes of drugs and the presence of the causal germ Helicobacter pylori in the stomach. The drugs are the H2 blockers such as cimetidine and ranitidine and the proton pump inhibitors such as omeprazole. These effectively arrest acid production. H. pylori can be eliminated from most patients with a combination of antibiotics and bismuth.

Esophagus

Duodenal ulcer

Duodenum

Peptic ulcer

Marginal ulcer

Common sites of ulcers in the human stomach. The need for ulcer surgery has diminished over the past 20-30 years due to the discovery that Helicobacter pylori, an infectious bacterium, plays a major role in causing ulcers. H. pylori can be eliminated from most patients with a combination of antibiotics and bismuth. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

3427

Ulcer surgery

Precautions There is a tumor of the pancreas that produces a hormone called gastrin. Gastrin causes ulcers by stimulating acid production. If this disease—Zollinger-Ellison syndrome—does not respond to medical treatment, either the tumor or the entire stomach must be removed.

Description The two primary goals of ulcer surgery, elimination of the current problem and prevention of future problems bring with them a third problem—to perpetuate the normal function of the bowel. The vagus nerves relax the pylorus, allowing the stomach to empty. Cutting the vagus nerves, while reducing the stomach’s acid production, also prevents stomach emptying. Therefore, the procedures described must guarantee stomach emptying along with their other goals. Total gastrectomy Removing the entire stomach is done only for resistant Zollinger-Ellison syndrome or extensive cancers. Antrectomy The lower half of the stomach makes most of the acid and gets all the peptic ulcers above the duodenum. Removing it leaves little place for ulcers to form and little acid to produce them. Vagotomy Cutting the vagus nerves can be done in three ways: • The main nerves can be cut completely as they enter the abdomen from the chest. • The branches that go to the stomach can be cut as they leave the main nerves. • The tiny branches that stimulate acid production can be cut on the surface of the stomach. Pyloroplasty Opening up the valve at the outlet of the stomach guarantees that the stomach can empty, even without vagus nerve stimulation. Pyloroplasty is ordinarily done by cutting across the muscle that surrounds the outlet. It can also be done by passing a balloon down from the mouth and inflating it forcefully to stretch out the pylorus (opening from the stomach to the intestine). Close perforation For some patients all that can be done is to close the hole in the bowel and wait for the patient to recover before initiating corrective surgery. 3428

Billroth I and II After removing a piece of the stomach, the remainder must be reattached to the rest of the bowel. Simply joining the upper stomach back to the duodenum is called a Billroth I or gastroduodenostomy. It is sometimes better to attach the stomach with another piece of bowel (the jejunum), creating a “y” with the bile drainage and the duodenum forming the second branch of the “y.” This part of the procedure is called a gastrojejunostomy. A gastroenterostomy is a more general term for connecting the stomach with any piece of bowel. A selective vagotomy can be done alone. A complete vagotomy requires either a pyloroplasty or antrectomy. An antrectomy must be reconnected with either a Billroth I or a Billroth II. Some of these procedures are now being done through a laparoscope.

Risks All of these procedures carry risks, generally in proportion to their benefits. The more extensive surgeries such as vagotomy and antrectomy with Billroth II reconnection have the highest success rate and the highest complication rate. Complications include: • Diarrhea after a meal • Dumping syndrome occurring after a meal and characterized by sweating, abdominal pain, vomiting, lightheadedness, and diarrhea • Hypoglycemia after a meal • Alkaline reflux gastritis marked by abdominal pain, vomiting of bile, diminished appetite, and iron-deficiency anemia • Recurrence of an ulcer • Malabsorption of necessary nutrients, especially iron, in patients who have had all or part of their stomachs removed. Resources BOOKS

Debas, Haile T., and Susan L. Orloff. “Surgical Therapy.” In Cecil Textbook of Medicine, ed. J. Claude Bennett and Fred Plum. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Friedman, Lawrence S., and Walter L. Peterson. “Peptic Ulcer and Related Disorders.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. Moody, Frank G., et al. “Stomach.” In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, ed. Mark Feldman, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Gastrin—A type of hormone that produces gastric juice. Hypoglycemia—An abnormal decrease in blood sugar level. Jejunum—Section of the small intestine. Laparoscope—A pencil-thin telescope that allows surgery to be done through half-inch incisions. Pylorus—The opening from the stomach to the intestine. Vagus nerve—Cranial nerves that supply the internal organs (viscera). Zollinger-Ellison syndrome—A syndrome marked by peptic ulcers and gastrinomas in the pancreas.

“Stomach and Duodenum.” In Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment. 10th ed. Ed. Lawrence W. Way. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1994.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Ulcerative colitis Definition Ulcerative colitis is a form of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). It causes swelling, ulcerations, and loss of function of the large intestine.

Description The primary problem in IBD is inflammation, as the name suggests. Inflammation is a process that often occurs in order to fight off foreign invaders in the body, including viruses, bacteria, and fungi. In response to such organisms, the body’s immune system begins to produce a variety of cells and chemicals intended to stop the invasion. These immune cells and chemicals, however, also have direct effects on the body’s tissues, resulting in heat, redness, swelling, and loss of function. No one knows what starts the cycle of inflammation in IBD, but the result is a swollen, boggy intestine. In ulcerative colitis, the inflammation affects the lining of the rectum and large intestine. It is thought that the inflammation begins in the last segment of large intestine, which empties into the rectum (sigmoid colon). This GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Ulcerative colitis differs from Crohn’s disease, which is a form of IBD that affects both the small and large intestines. The inflammation of ulcerative colitis occurs only in the lining of the intestine (unlike Crohn’s disease which affects all of the layers of the intestinal wall). As the inflammation continues, the tissue of the intestine begins to slough off, leaving pits (ulcerations) which often become infected. Like Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis occurs in all age groups, with the most common age of diagnosis being 15–35 years of age. Men and women are affected equally. Whites are more frequently affected than other racial groups, and people of Jewish origin have 3–6 times greater likelihood of suffering from any IBD. IBD is familial; an IBD patient has a 20% chance of having other relatives who are fellow sufferers.

Causes and symptoms No specific cause of ulcerative colitis has been identified. Although no organism (virus, bacteria, or fungi) has been found to set off the cycle of inflammation that occurs in ulcerative colitis, some researchers continue to suspect that some such organism is responsible for initiating the cycle. Other researchers are concentrating on identifying some change in the cells of the colon that would make the body’s immune system accidentally begin treating those cells as foreign invaders. Other evidence for such a disorder of the immune system includes the high number of other immune disorders that tend to accompany ulcerative colitis. The first symptoms of ulcerative colitis are abdominal cramping and pain, a sensation of urgent need to have a bowel movement (defecate), and blood and pus in the stools. Some patients experience diarrhea, fever, and weight loss. If the diarrhea continues, signs of severe fluid loss (dehydration) begin to appear, including low blood pressure, fast heart rate, and dizziness. Severe complications of ulcerative colitis include perforation of the intestine (in which the wall of the intestine develops a hole), toxic dilation of the colon (in which the colon become quite large in diameter), and the development of colon cancer. Intestinal perforation occurs when long-standing inflammation and ulceration of the intestine weakens the wall to such a degree that a hole occurs. This is a lifethreatening complication, because the contents of the intestine (which under normal conditions contains a large 3429

Ulcerative colitis

KEY TERMS

inflammation may spread through the entire large intestine, but only rarely affects the very last section of the small intestine (ileum). The rest of the small intestine remains normal.

Ulcerative colitis

will usually reveal the presence of blood and pus (white blood cells). Blood tests may show an increase in the number of white blood cells, which is an indication of inflammation occurring somewhere in the body. The blood test may also reveal anemia, particularly when a great deal of blood has been lost in the stool.

A specimen of a colon indicating ulcerative colitis. (Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

number of bacteria) spill into the abdomen. The presence of bacteria in the abdomen can result in a massive infection called peritonitis. Toxic dilation of the colon is thought to occur because the intestinal inflammation interferes with the normal function of the muscles of the intestine. This allows the intestine to become lax, and its diameter begins to increase. The enlarged diameter thins the walls further, increasing the risk of perforation and peritonitis. When the diameter of the intestine is quite large, and infection is present, the condition is referred to as “toxic megacolon.” Patients with ulcerative colitis have a significant risk of developing colon cancer. This risk seems to begin around 10 years after diagnosis of ulcerative colitis. The risk becomes statistically greater every year: • At 10 years, the risk of cancer is about 0.5–1%. • At 15 years, the risk of cancer is about 12%. • At 20 years, the risk of cancer is about 23%. • At 24 years, the risk of cancer is about 42%. The overall risk of developing cancer seems to be greatest for those patients with the largest extent of intestine involved in ulcerative colitis. Patients with ulcerative colitis also have a high chance of experiencing other disorders, including inflammation of the joints (arthritis), inflammation of the vertebrae (spondylitis), ulcers in the mouth and on the skin, the development of painful, red bumps on the skin, inflammation of several areas of the eye, and various disorders of the liver and gallbladder.

Diagnosis Diagnosis is first suspected based on the symptoms that a patient is experiencing. Examination of the stool 3430

The most important method of diagnosis is endoscopy, during which a doctor passes a flexible tube with a tiny, fiberoptic camera device through the rectum and into the colon. The doctor can then examine the lining of the intestine for signs of inflammation and ulceration that might indicate ulcerative colitis. A tiny sample (biopsy) of the intestine will be removed through the endoscope, which will be examined under a microscope for evidence of ulcerative colitis. Because of the increased risk of cancer in patients with ulcerative colitis, endoscopic exam will need to be repeated frequently. Biopsies should be taken regularly, to closely monitor the intestine for the development of cancer or precancerous changes. X-ray examination is helpful to determine the amount of intestine affected by the disease. However, xray examinations requiring the use of barium should be delayed until treatment has begun. Barium is a chalky solution that the patient drinks or is administered through the rectum and into the intestine (enema). The presence of barium in the intestine allows more detail to be seen on x-ray pictures. However, because of the risk of intestinal perforation in ulcerative colitis, most doctors begin treatment before stressing the wall of the intestine with the barium solution.

Treatment Treatment for ulcerative colitis addresses the underlying inflammation, as well as the problems occurring due to continued diarrhea and blood loss. Inflammation is treated with a drug called sulfasalazine, Sulfasalazine is made up of two parts. One part is related to the sulfa antibiotics; the other part is a form of the anti-inflammatory chemical salicylic acid (related to aspirin). Sulfasalazine is not well-absorbed from the intestine, so it stays mostly within the intestine, where it is broken down into its components. It is believed to be primarily the salicylic acid component that is active in treating ulcerative colitis, by fighting inflammation. For patients who do not respond to sulfasalazine, steroid medications (such as prednisone) are the next choice. Depending on the degree of blood loss, a patient with ulcerative colitis may require blood transfusions and fluid replacement through a needle in the vein (intravenous or IV). Medications that can slow diarrhea must be used with great care, because they may actually cause the development of toxic megacolon. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Similarly, a patient with proven cancer of the colon, or even a patient who shows certain signs thought to indicate a precancerous condition, will need his or her colon removed. Removal of the colon is called a colectomy. When a colectomy is performed, a piece of the small intestine (ileum) is pulled through an opening in the abdomen. This bit of intestine is fashioned surgically to allow a special bag to be placed over it, in order to catch the body’s waste (feces) which no longer can be passed through the large intestine and out of the anus. This opening, which will remain for the duration of the patient’s life, is called an ileostomy.

Prognosis Remission refers to a disease becoming inactive for a period of time. The rate of remission of ulcerative colitis (after a first attack) is nearly 90%. Those individuals whose colitis is confined primarily to the left side of the large intestine have the best prognosis. Those individuals with extensive colitis, involving most or all of the large intestine, have a much poorer prognosis. Recent studies show that about 10% of these patients will have died by 10 years after diagnosis. About 20–25% of all ulcerative colitis patients will require colectomy. Unlike the case for patients with Crohn’s disease, however, such radical surgery results in a cure of the disease. Resources BOOKS

Glickman, Robert. “Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn’s Disease.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. Long, James W. The Essential Guide to Chronic Illness. New York: Harperperennial, 1997. Saibil, Fred. Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis. Buffalo, NY: Firefly Books, 1997. PERIODICALS

Martin, Frances L. “Ulcerative Colitis.” American Journal of Nursing 97 (Aug. 1997): 38+. Peppercorn, Mark A., and Susannah K. Gordon. “Making Sense of a Mystery Ailment: Inflammatory Bowel Disease.” Harvard Health Letter 22 (Dec. 1996): 4+. “Ulcerative Colitis: Manageable, With a Brighter Outlook.” Mayo Clinic Health Letter 13 (Dec. 1995): 1+. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Endoscopy—A type of medical examination in which an instrument called an endoscope is passed into an area of the body (the bladder or intestine, for example). The endoscope usually has a fiberoptic camera, which allows a greatly magnified image to be projected onto a video screen, to be viewed by the operator. Many endoscopes also allow the operator to retrieve a small sample (biopsy) of the area being examined, in order to more closely view the tissue under a microscope. Immune system—The system of the body that is responsible for producing various cells and chemicals that fight off infection by viruses, bacteria, fungi, and other foreign invaders. In autoimmune disease, these cells and chemicals are turned against the body itself. Inflammation—The result of the body’s attempts to fight off and wall off an area that is infected. Inflammation results in the classic signs of redness, heat, swelling, and loss of function.

ORGANIZATIONS

Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America, Inc. 386 Park Avenue South, 17th Floor, New York, NY 10016-8804. (800)932-2423.

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Ulcers (digestive) Definition In general, an ulcer is any eroded area of skin or a mucous membrane, marked by tissue disintegration. In common usage, however, ulcer is usually used to refer to disorders in the upper digestive tract. The terms ulcer, gastric ulcer, and peptic ulcer are often used loosely and interchangeably. Peptic ulcers can develop in the lower part of the esophagus, the stomach, the first part of the small intestine (the duodenum), and the second part of the small intestine (the jejunum).

Description It is estimated that 2% of the adult population in the United States has active peptic ulcers, and that about 3431

Ulcers (digestive)

A patient with toxic megacolon requires close monitoring and care in the hospital. He or she will usually be given steroid medications through an IV, and may be put on antibiotics. If these measures do not improve the situation, the patient will have to undergo surgery to remove the colon. This is done because the risk of death after perforation of toxic megacolon is greater than 50%.

Ulcers (digestive)

10% will develop ulcers at some point in their lives. There are about 500,000 new cases of peptic ulcer in the United States every year, with as many as 4 million recurrences. The male/female ratio for ulcers of the digestive tract is 3:1. The most common forms of peptic ulcer are duodenal and gastric. About 80% of all ulcers in the digestive tract are duodenal ulcers. This type of ulcer may strike people in any age group but is most common in males between the ages of 20 and 45. The incidence of duodenal ulcers has dropped over the past 30 years. Gastric ulcers account for about 16% of peptic ulcers. They are most common in males between the ages of 55 and 70. The single most common cause of gastric ulcers is the use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or NSAIDs. The widespread use of NSAIDs is thought to explain why the incidence of gastric ulcers in the United States is rising.

Causes and symptoms Causes of peptic ulcers There are three major causes of peptic ulcers: infection, certain types of medication, and disorders that cause oversecretion of stomach juices. HELICOBACTER PYLORI INFECTION. Helicobacter pylori is a rod-shaped gram-negative bacterium that lives in the mucous tissues that line the digestive tract. Infection with H. pylori is the most common cause of duodenal ulcers. About 95% of patients with duodenal ulcers are infected with H. pylori, as opposed to only 70% of patients with gastric ulcers. USE OF NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS (NSAIDS). Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,

or NSAIDs, are painkillers that many people use for headaches, sore muscles, arthritis, menstrual cramps, and similar complaints. Many NSAIDs are available without prescriptions. Common NSAIDs include aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), flurbiprofen (Ansaid, Ocufen), ketoprofen (Orudis), and indomethacin (Indacin). Chronic NSAID users have 40 times the risk of developing a gastric ulcer as nonusers. Users are also three times more likely than nonusers to develop bleeding or fatal complications of ulcers. Aspirin is the NSAID that is most likely to cause ulcers. MISCELLANEOUS SYNDROMES AND DISORDERS.

Fewer than 5% of peptic ulcers are due to these disorders. They include Zollinger-Ellison syndrome, a disorder in which small tumors, called gastrinomas, secrete a hormone (gastrin) that stimulates the production of digestive juices. Because of this excess secretion, these disorders are sometimes called hypersecretory syndromes. 3432

OTHER RISK FACTORS. Smoking is an important risk factor that increases a patient’s chance of developing an ulcer, decreases the body’s response to therapy, and increases the chances of dying from ulcer complications. Blood type appears to be a predisposing factor for ulcer location; people with type A blood are more likely to have gastric ulcers, while those with type O are more likely to develop duodenal ulcers. The role of emotional stress in ulcer development is currently debated. Present research indicates that an individual’s attitudes toward stress, rather than the amount of stress by itself, is a better predictor of vulnerability to peptic ulcers. Preferences for high-fat or spicy foods do not appear to be significant risk factors.

Symptoms GASTRIC ULCERS. The symptoms of gastric ulcers include feelings of indigestion and heartburn, weight loss, and repeated episodes of gastrointestinal bleeding. Ulcer pain is often described as gnawing, dull, aching, or resembling hunger pangs. The patient may be nauseated and suffer loss of appetite. About 30% of patients with gastric ulcers are awakened by pain at night. Many patients have periods of chronic ulcer pain alternating with symptom-free periods that last for several weeks or months. This characteristic is called periodicity. DUODENAL ULCERS. The symptoms of duodenal ulcers include heartburn, stomach pain relieved by eating or antacids, weight gain, and a burning sensation at the back of the throat. The patient is most likely to feel discomfort two to four hours after meals, or after having citrus juice, coffee, or aspirin. About 50% of patients with duodenal ulcers awake during the night with pain, usually between midnight and 3 A.M. A regular pattern of ulcer pain associated with certain periods of day or night or a time interval after meals is called rhythmicity.

Not all digestive ulcers produce symptoms; as many as 20% of ulcer patients have so-called painless or silent ulcers. Silent ulcers occur most frequently in the elderly and in chronic NSAID users. Complications Between 10–20% of peptic ulcer patients develop complications at some time during the course of their illness. All of these are potentially serious conditions. Complications are not always preceded by diagnosis of or treatment for ulcers; as many as 60% of patients with complications have not had prior symptoms. HEMORRHAGE. Bleeding is the most common complication of ulcers. It may result in anemia, vomiting blood (hematemesis), or the passage of bright red blood through the rectum (melena). About half of all cases of bleeding

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Ulcers (digestive)

from the upper digestive tract are caused by ulcers. The mortality rate from ulcer hemorrhage is 6–10%. PERFORATION. About 5% of ulcer patients develop perforations, which are holes in the duodenal or gastric wall through which the stomach contents can leak out into the abdominal cavity. The incidence of perforation is rising because of the increased use of NSAIDs, particularly among the elderly. The signs of an ulcer perforation are severe pain, fever, and tenderness when the doctor touches the abdomen. Most cases of perforation require emergency surgery. The mortality rate is about 5%. PENETRATION. Ulcer penetration is a complication in which the ulcer erodes through the intestinal wall without digestive fluid leaking into the abdomen. Instead, the ulcer penetrates into an adjoining organ, such as the pancreas or liver. The signs of penetration are more severe pain without rhythmicity or periodicity, and the spread of the pain to the lower back. OBSTRUCTION. Obstruction of the stomach outlet occurs in about 2% of ulcer patients. It is caused by swelling or scar tissue formation that narrows the opening between the stomach and the duodenum (the pylorus). Over 90% of patients with obstruction have recurrent vomiting of partly digested or undigested food; 20% are seriously dehydrated. These patients also usually feel full after eating only a little food, and may lose weight.

Diagnosis Physical examination and patient history The diagnosis of peptic ulcers is rarely made on the basis of a physical examination alone. The only significant finding may be mild soreness in the area over the stomach when the doctor presses (palpates) it. The doctor is more likely to suspect an ulcer if the patient has one or more of the following risk factors: • male sex • age over 45 • recent weight loss, bleeding, recurrent vomiting, jaundice, back pain, or anemia

A clinical photograph of a large duodenal ulcer after surgical removal. The ulcer is the prominent triangular crater at center. (Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

tissues lining the stomach and duodenum. Duodenal ulcers are rarely malignant. If the ulcer is in the stomach, however, the doctor will take a tissue sample because 3–5% of gastric ulcers are malignant. Radiological studies are sometimes used instead of endoscopy because they are less expensive, more comfortable for the patient, and are 85% accurate in detecting malignancies. Laboratory tests BLOOD TESTS. Blood tests usually give normal results in ulcer patients without complications. They are useful, however, in evaluating anemia from a bleeding ulcer or a high white cell count from perforation or penetration. Serum gastrin levels can be used to screen for Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. TESTS FOR HELICOBACTER PYLORI. It is important to test for H. pylori because almost all ulcer patients who are not taking NSAIDs are infected. Noninvasive tests include blood tests for immune response and a breath test. In the breath test, the patient is given an oral dose of radiolabeled urea. If H. pylori is present, it will react with the urea and the patient will exhale radiolabeled carbon dioxide. Invasive tests for H. pylori include tissue biopsies and cultures performed from fluid obtained by endoscopy.

• history of using aspirin or other NSAIDs • history of heavy smoking • family history of ulcers or stomach cancer Endoscopy and imaging studies An endoscopy is considered the best procedure for diagnosing digestive ulcers and for taking samples of stomach tissue for biopsies. An endoscope is a slender tube-shaped instrument that allows the doctor to view the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Treatment Medications Most drugs that are currently given to treat ulcers work either by lowering the rate of stomach acid secretion or by protecting the mucous tissues that line the digestive tract. ANTISECRETORY DRUGS. Medications that lower the rate of stomach acid secretions fall into two major cate-

3433

Ulcers (digestive)

treatments is to rebalance the stomach’s hydrochloric acid output and to enhance the mucosal lining of the stomach.

A barium x-ray image of a gastric ulcer. (Photograph by Bates, M.D., Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

gories: proton pump inhibitors, which bind an enzyme that secretes stomach acid, and H2 receptor antagonists, which work by reducing intracellular acid secretion. The proton pump inhibitors include omeprazole (Prilosec) and lansoprazole (Prevacid). The H2 receptor antagonists include ranitidine (Zantac), cimetidine (Tagamet), famotidine (Pepcid), and nizatidine (Axid). Both types of drugs have few serious side effects and appear to be safe for long-term use. PROTECTIVE DRUGS. The drugs that are currently used to protect the stomach tissues are sucralfate (Carafate), which forms a pastelike substance that clings to the mucous tissues and prevents further damage from stomach acid; and bismuth preparations. A third type of protective drug includes misoprostol (Cytotec), which is often given to patients with ulcers caused by NSAIDs.

Surgery Surgical treatment of ulcers is generally used only for complications and suspected malignancies. The most common surgical procedures that are used are vagotomies, in which the connections of the vagus nerve to the stomach are cut in order to reduce acid secretion; and antrectomies, which involve the removal of a part of the stomach (the antrum). Eradication of Helicobacter pylori Most doctors presently recommend treatment to eliminate H. pylori in order to prevent ulcer recurrences. Without such treatment, ulcers recur at the rate of 80% per year. The usual regimen used to eliminate the bacterium is a combination of tetracycline, bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol), and metronidazole (Metizol).

Food allergies have been pointed to as a major cause of peptic (stomach) ulcers. An elimination/challenge diet can help identify the allergenic food(s) and continued elimination of these foods can assist in healing the ulcer. People with ulcers should not take aspirin. They should also stop smoking, since smoking irritates the mucosal lining of the stomach. Antacids should be avoided by anyone with an ulcer, because they can cause a rebound effect of increasing gastric acid secretion, as well as deplete vital nutrients necessary for healing. Stress reduction is also important for ulcer sufferers. Botanical medicine offers a variety of remedies that may be helpful in ulcer treatment. Deglycyrrhizinated licorice or DGL, in a chewable or powder form, can help heal the mucous membranes and increase mucous so that it mixes with saliva to protect the membranes. Raw cabbage juice, high in glutanic acid, is very effective in healing an ulcer (take 1 quart per day in divided doses). Soothing herbs, such as plantain (Plantago major), marsh mallow (Althaea officinalis), and slippery elm (Ulmus fulva); astringent herbs, such as geranium (Pelargonium odoratissimum); and the anitmicrobial herb goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) can all be effective. Nutritionists advise taking antioxidant nutrients, including vitamins A, C, and E, zinc, and selenium.

Prognosis The prognosis for recovery from ulcers is good for most patients. Very few ulcers fail to respond to the medications that are currently used to treat them. Recurrences can be cut to 5% by eradication of H. pylori. Most patients who develop complications recover without problems even when emergency surgery is necessary.

Prevention Strategies for the prevention of ulcers or their recurrence include the following: • eradication of H. pylori in patients already diagnosed with ulcers • giving misoprostol to patients who must take NSAIDs • avoiding unnecessary use of aspirin and NSAIDs

Alternative treatment Alternative treatments can relieve symptoms and promote healing of ulcers. A primary goal of these 3434

• giving up smoking • cutting down on alcohol, tea, coffee, and sodas containing caffeine GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Duodenum—The first of the three segments of the small intestine. The duodenum connects the stomach and the jejunum. Most peptic ulcers are in the duodenum. Helicobacter pylori—A gram-negative rod-shaped bacterium that lives in the tissues of the stomach and causes inflammation of the stomach lining. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome—A disorder characterized by the presence of tumors (gastrinomas) that secrete a hormone (gastrin), which stimulates the production of digestive juices.

Purpose Ultraviolet (UV) light treatment is used primarily in cases of severe psoriasis that have not responded to other medications or in cases affecting large portions of the body. Patients will typically receive a series of 3–5 weekly treatments for a month or more to bring their psoriasis symptoms into check. They may also receive periodic maintenance treatments to prevent recurrence of their psoriasis. Other skin conditions treated with UV light treatments are vitiligo, a condition in which people lose pigmentation in large patches of their skin, and atopic dermatitis, an allergy-related skin condition that produces itchy, reddish, and scaly patches of skin.

Resources

Precautions

BOOKS

McQuaid, Kenneth R. “Alimentary Tract.” In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1998. 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. Miller, David K. “Chronic Abdominal Pain.” In Current Diagnosis. Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B. Conn, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. “Peptic Ulcers.” In Professional Guide to Diseases, ed. Stanley Loeb, et al. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1991. Viggiano, Thomas R. “Peptic Ulcer Disease.” In Current Diagnosis. Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B. Conn, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. “Stomach and Duodenum.” In Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment. 10th ed. Ed. Lawrence W. Way. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1994. ORGANIZATIONS

American College of Gastroenterology. 4900-B South ThirtyFirst St., Arlington, VA 22206-1656. (703) 820-7400. . Digestive Health Initiative. 7910 Woodmont Ave., #914, Bethesda, MD 20814. (800) 668-5237. .

Rebecca J. Frey

Ultrasonic lithotripsy see Lithotripsy

Ultraviolet light treatment Definition Ultraviolet light treatment uses a particular band of the nonvisible light spectrum to treat psoriasis and a GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Exposure to UV radiation is known to prematurely age the skin over time and increase the risk of skin cancer. These potential effects should be weighed against the potential benefits of the treatment. A history will be taken regarding sun exposure and burning, medications, such as diuretics, that may increase UV sensitivity exposure, and any history of skin cancers. Sometimes, UV light treatments are given in combination with photosensitizing agents, which maximize UV’s effects on the skin. Patients who receive these agents, called psoralens, must take care to avoid exposure to sunlight, which also contains UV radiation. Exposure to UV radiation can also cause cataracts and other eye damage, so the patient’s eyes must be adequately shielded during the treatments.

Description UV light treatment can employ one of two bands of the ultraviolet spectrum: ultraviolet A (UVA), and ultraviolet B (UVB). Patients receive full body treatments in special light boxes; smaller areas of the skin are sometimes treated with hand-held devices. UVB treatment Psoriasis is the most common skin disease treated with UVB light treatment. Its mechanism of action remains unclear, but investigators speculate it may kill abnormal skin cells or alter immune system reactions in the skin. Most patients require 18–30 treatments before substantial improvement or complete clearing is seen. The intensity of the UV applied will vary depending on the patient’s skin type. Fair-skinned patients will start with a relatively weaker dose; dark-skinned patients, a 3435

Ultraviolet light treatment

variety of other skin diseases. It can be used alone or in combination with other medications applied directly to the skin or taken internally.

Ultraviolet light treatment

stronger dose. Physicians will first expose a small area of skin to UVB to determine the minimum erythema dose (MED), the minimum amount of UVB that produces redness 24 hours after exposure. Patients will be exposed for short times early in the treatment cycle, but these times will gradually increase over time. The Goeckerman regimen, a treatment that combines UVB light with coal tar applied to the skin, is among the oldest and most frequently used treatments for patients with moderate to severe psoriasis. The coal tar is a photosensitizing agent, and, when it interacts with UVB, it appears to limit the abnormal turnover of skin cells characteristic of psoriasis. Although treatments with UVB and coal tar are highly effective, many patients dislike the smell. Some investigators believe use of petroleum jelly or other emollients are just as effective as the coaltar preparations. In addition to their UVB treatments, many patients will receive systemic agents such as methotrexate, a drug used in severe case of psoriasis, and certain vitamin A derivatives called retinoids. PUVA treatment Psoralens are photosensitizing agents found in plants. They have been known since ancient Egypt but have only been available in a chemically synthesized form since the 1970s. Psoralens are taken systemically or can be applied directly to the skin. The psoralens allow a relatively lower dose of UVA to be used. When they are combined with exposure to UVA in PUVA, they are highly effective at clearing psoriasis. Like UVB light treatments, the reason remains unclear, though investigators speculate there may be similar effects on cell turnover and the skin’s immune response. Choosing the proper dose for PUVA is similar to the procedure followed with UVB. The physician can choose a dose based on the patient’s skin type. Often, however, a small area of the patient’s skin will be exposed to UVA after ingestion of psoralen. The dose of UVA that produces uniform redness 72 hours later, called the minimum phototoxic dose (MPD), becomes the starting dose for treatment. Some patients experience nausea and itching after ingesting the psoralen compound. For these patients “bath PUVA” may be a good option.

worn to protect the eyes. Some physicians apply an emollient, such as petroleum jelly, to the skin or other topical agents, such as coal tar, to enhance the results. In PUVA treatments, the psoralen is usually taken one hour before the treatment.

Aftercare No major aftercare is required following UV light treatments. Patients, however, must take great care to limit or eliminate other exposures to UV radiation, such as from sunlight or tanning beds, because of the increased risk of premature aging of the skin and the development of skin cancers. Patients should monitor their skin closely for any signs of precancerous or cancerous skin growths in the future.

Risks People who receive UV light treatments are at higher risk of premature aging of the skin, and of developing skin cancer. These risks should be balanced against the benefits of treatment. Patients must also take care to limit or eliminate their exposure to other sources of UV radiation, especially if they are taking a psoralen compound in addition to receiving the UV treatments.

Normal results Psoriasis will normally show significant improvement to complete healing with three to five UVB treatments a week for about four to five weeks. PUVA treatments may require a bit longer to take effect, but because the overall dosage of UV is lower, they are thought by some investigators to be a safer alternative to UVB treatments.

Abnormal results Modern light boxes carefully control the dosage of UV radiation and the exposure time. Overdose or overexposure is possible, however, and can lead to severe burns. It is important to choose a treatment provider who is experienced in the technique. It is also important to tell the physician about all medications being taken by the patient. Some medications, either alone or in combination with a psoralen, can provoke an extreme reaction to UV radiation. Resources

Preparation No major preparation is required for UV light treatments. Areas of the skin that are especially sensitive to the effects of UV light, such as the groin, backside, or face, are shielded during the treatments. Areas not affected by psoriasis are also covered. Special goggles are 3436

BOOKS

Dover, Jeffrey S. “Phototherapy.” In Manual of Clinical Problems in Dermatology, ed. Susan M. Olbricht, et al. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.,1992. Lynch, Peter J., and W. Mitchell Sams Jr. Principles and Practice of Dermatology. 2nd ed. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1996. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Goeckerman regimen—UVB light therapy combined with topical coal-tar preparations. Minimum erythema dose—The minimum amount of UVB that produces redness 24 hours after exposure. It is the starting dose for UVB light treatments. Minimum phototoxic dose— The dose of UVA that produces uniform redness 72 hours after ingesting a psoralen compound. It becomes the starting dose for PUVA treatment. Psoralen—A family of photosensitizing chemicals that can be found in lemons, celery, and other plants. Chemically synthesized versions are used to augment the effects of UVA light treatments. PUVA treatments—Treatments with the photosensitizers called psoralens and UVA. Ultraviolet light—A portion of the light spectrum not visible to the eye. Two bands of the UV spectrum, UVA and UVB, are used to treat psoriasis and other skin diseases.

PERIODICALS

Lowe, Nicholas J. “Photo(chemo)therapy: General Principles.” Clinics in Dermatology 15 (Sept./Oct. 1997): 745-752. Nee, Tham Siew. “Phototherapy.” Clinics in Dermatology 15 (Sept./Oct. 1997): 753-767.

In the fetus, the testes are in the abdomen. As development progresses they migrate downward through the groin and into the scrotum. This event takes place late in fetal development, during the eighth month of gestation. Thirty percent of premature boys have testes that have not yet made the full descent. Only 3–4% of full-term baby boys have undescended testes, and half of those complete the journey by the age of three months. Eighty percent of all undescended testes cases naturally correct themselves during the first year of life. Undescended testes that are not corrected can lead to sterility and an increased risk of testicular cancer.

Causes and symptoms The cause of undescended testes is presently unknown, however its symptoms are quite apparent. One or all of the testicles can be undescended, therefore the testicles appear to be either missing or lopsided.

Diagnosis The newborn examination always checks for testes in the scrotum. It they are not found, a search will be conducted, but not necessarily right away. In most cases, the testes will drop into place later. If the testes are present at all, they can be anywhere within a couple inches of the appropriate spot. In 5% of cases, one testis is completely absent. In 10%, the condition occurs on both sides. Presence of undescended testes is indicated by measuring the amount of gonadotropin hormone in the blood.

ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Dermatology. 930 N. Meacham Road, P.O. Box 4014, Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014. (847) 3300230. . National Psoriasis Foundation. 6600 SW 92nd Ave., Suite 300, Portland OR 97223-7195. (503) 244-7404. .

Treatment Once it is determined that the testes will not naturally descend, surgery becomes necessary. The procedure is called an orchiopexy and is relatively simple once the testes are located. The surgery is usually performed when the boy is between one to two years old.

Richard H. Camer

Uncinariasis see Hookworm disease

Undescended testes Definition Also known as cryptorchidism, undescended testes is a congenital condition characterized by testicles that do not extend to the scrotum. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Prognosis Undescended testes must be treated to eliminate the increased risk of testicular cancer and the possibility of sterility. Undescended testes are twice as likely to develop cancer. Ten percent of all testicular cancers are in undescended testes. Resources BOOKS

Bennett, J. Claude, and Fred Plum, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. 3437

Undescended testes

Description

Upper GI-exam

KEY TERMS Cryptorchidism—Undescended testes. Embryonic—Early stages of life in the womb. Fetal—Refers to the fetus, also known in the first two months after conception as an embryo. Orchiopexy—Surgical procedure that places the testicles in the scrotum.

Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics. Ed. Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Rajfer, Jacob. “Congenital Anomalies of the Testes and Scrotum.” In Campbell’s Urology, ed. Patrick C. Walsh, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998. Rozauski, Thomas, et al. “Surgery of the Scrotum and Testis in Children.” In Campbell’s Urology, ed. Patrick C. Walsh, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Undulant fever see Brucellosis Unipolar depression see Depressive disorders

Upper GI exam Definition An upper GI examination is a fluoroscopic examination (a type of x-ray imaging) of the upper gastrointestinal tract, including the esophagus, stomach, and upper small intestine (duodenum).

Purpose An upper GI series is frequently requested when a patient experiences unexplained symptoms of abdominal pain, difficulty in swallowing (dysphagia), regurgitation, diarrhea, or weight loss. It is used to help diagnose disorders and diseases of, or related to, the upper gastrointestinal tract, including cases of hiatal hernia, diverticuli, ulcers, tumors, obstruction, enteritis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, Crohn’s disease, and pulmonary aspiration.

Precautions Because of the risks of radiation exposure to the fetus, pregnant women are advised to avoid this procedure. Patients with an obstruction or perforation in their 3438

bowel should not ingest barium (a radioactive substance used to show contrast in the images) for an upper GI, but may still be able to undergo the procedure if a water-soluble contrast medium is substituted for the barium. Glucagon, a medication sometimes given prior to an upper GI procedure, may cause nausea and dizziness.

Description An upper GI series takes place in a hospital or clinic setting and is performed by an x-ray technician and a radiologist. A radiologist typically is in attendance to oversee the procedure, and view and interpret the fluoroscopic pictures. Before the test begins, the patient is sometimes administered an injection of glucagon, a medication which slows stomach and bowel activity, to allow the radiologist to get a clearer picture of the gastrointestinal tract. In order to further improve the clarity of the upper GI pictures, the patient may be given a cup of baking soda crystals to swallow, which distend the stomach by producing gas. Once these preparatory steps are complete, the patient stands against an upright x-ray table, and a fluoroscopic screen is placed in front of him. The patient will be asked to drink from a cup of flavored barium sulfate, a thick and chalky-tasting liquid that allows the radiologist to see the digestive tract, while the radiologist views the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum on the fluoroscopic screen. The patient will be asked to change positions frequently in order to coat the entire surface of the gastrointestinal tract with barium. The technician or radiologist may press on the patient’s abdomen in order to spread the barium. The x-ray table will also be moved several times throughout the procedure. The radiologist will ask the patient to hold his breath periodically while exposures are being taken. The entire procedure takes approximately 30 minutes. In some cases, in addition to the standard upper GI series, a doctor may request a detailed intestine, or small bowel, radiography and fluoroscopy series; it is also called a small bowel follow-through (SBFT). Once the preliminary upper GI series is complete, the patient will be escorted to a waiting area while the barium travels down through the rest of the small intestinal path. Every 15–30 minutes, the patient will return to the x-ray suite for additional x rays, or films. Once the barium has completed its trip down the small bowel tract, the test is completed. This procedure can take anywhere from one to four hours. Esophageal radiography, also called a barium esophagram or a barium swallow, is a study of the esophagus only, and is usually performed as part of the upper GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Preparation Patients must not eat, drink, or smoke for eight hours prior to undergoing an upper GI examination. Longer dietary restrictions may be required, depending on the type and diagnostic purpose of the test. Patients undergoing a small bowel follow-through exam may be asked to take laxatives the day prior to the test. Upper GI patients are typically required to wear a hospital gown, or similar attire, and to remove all jewelry, so the camera has an unobstructed view of the abdomen.

Aftercare No special aftercare treatment or regimen is required for an upper GI series. The patient may eat and drink as soon as the test is completed. The barium sulfate may make the patient’s stool white for several days, and patients are encouraged to drink plenty of fluids in order to eliminate it from their system.

Risks Because the upper GI series is an x-ray procedure, it does involve minor exposure to ionizing radiation. Unless the patient is pregnant, or multiple radiological or fluoroscopic studies are required, the small dose of radiation incurred during a single procedure poses little risk. However, multiple studies requiring fluoroscopic exposure that are conducted in a short time period have been known, on rare occasions, to cause skin death (necrosis) in some individuals. This risk can be minimized by careful monitoring and documentation of cumulative radiation doses administered to these patients.

Normal results A normal upper GI series will show a healthy, functioning, and unobstructed digestive tract.

Abnormal results Obstructions or inflammation, including ulcers of the esophagus, stomach, or small intestine; or irregularities in the swallowing mechanism are just a few of the possible abnormalities that may show up on an upper GI series. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Resources BOOKS

Ross, Linda, ed. Gastrointestinal Diseases and Disorders Sourcebook. Vol. 16. Detroit: Omnigraphics, Inc., 1996. PERIODICALS

Newman, J. “Radiographic and Endoscopic Evaluation of the Upper GI Tract.” Radiology Technology 69,no. 3 (Jan./Feb. 1998): 213-26.

Urea clearance by the kidneys see Kidney function tests

Ureteral stenting Definition Ureteral stents are thin catheters threaded into segments of the ureter that carry urine, produced by the kidney, either down into the bladder internally, or to an external collection system. Insertion is most often done through the skin (percutaneously); however, in the presence of kidney or ureteral stones, stenting is ideally done during cystoscopy.

Purpose Ureteral stenting may be placed on a long-term basis (months to years) in order to bypass ureteral obstruction. Short-term stenting (weeks to months) may be used as an adjunct to open surgical procedures of the urinary tract to provide a mold around which healing can occur, or to divert the urinary flow away from areas of leakage. Following balloon dilation or incision of ureteral strictures, placement of stents maintains the functionality of the ureters. Stents may also be used in the presence of kidney stones to manipulate or prevent stone migration prior to treatment, or to make the ureters more easily identifiable during difficult surgical procedures. Ureteral stents may be used in those with active kidney infection or with markedly diseased, intolerant bladders (e.g., damage from radiation therapy, bladder invasion by adjacent neoplasm).

Preparation The procedure should be thoroughly explained by a medical professional before it takes place. The patient will be asked to put on a hospital gown. If the procedure is performed with the aid of a cytoscope, the patient will assume a position that is typically used in a gynecological exam. 3439

Ureteral stenting

GI series. It is commonly used to diagnose the cause of difficulty in swallowing (dysphagia) and for detecting hiatal hernia. A barium sulfate liquid, and sometimes pieces of food covered in barium, are given to the patient to drink and eat while a radiologist examines the swallowing mechanism on a fluoroscopic screen. The test takes approximately 30 minutes.

Urethritis

KEY TERMS Cystoscopy—Examination or treatment of the interior of the urinary bladder by looking through a special instrument with reflected light. Stricture—An abnormal narrowing of a tube or passageway. Ureter—The tube-like passageway in the body that carries urine from the kidney to the bladder.

Ureterostomy see Urinary diversion surgery Urethra defects see Hypospadias and epispadias

Urethritis Definition Urethritis is an inflammation of the urethra that is usually caused by an infection.

Aftercare Stents must be periodically replaced to prevent fractures within the catheter wall, or buildup of encrustation. Stent replacement is recommended approximately every six months or more often in patients who form stones.

Normal results Normally, a ureteral stent assures the patient of a free flow of urine. Postoperatively, urine flow will be monitored to ensure the stent has not been dislodged or obstructed.

Abnormal results Serious complications of the procedure occur in approximately four percent of cases, with minor complications in another 10%. These may include: • Bleeding. Usually minor and easily treated, occasionally requiring transfusion. • Catheter migration or dislodgement. May require readjustment with the fluoroscope in the Radiology Department. • Coiling of the stent within the ureter. May cause lower abdominal pain or flank pain on urination, urinary frequency, or blood in the urine. • Introduction or worsening of infection. • Penetration of adjacent organs (e.g., bowel, gallbladder, or lungs). Resources BOOKS

Hanno, Philip, and Alan Wein. Clinical Manual of Urology. Philadelphia: McGraw Hill, Inc., 1994. Lerner, Judith. Mosby’s Manual Of Urologic Nursing. St. Louis: C. V. Mosby Co., 1982. Schrier, Robert, and Carl Gottschalk. Diseases of the Kidney. Philadelphia: Little, Brown and Co., 1997.

Kathleen D. Wright, RN 3440

Description The urethra is the canal that moves urine from the bladder to the outside of the body. When this canal becomes infected, inflammation occurs due to the accumulation of white blood cells in the area. When this occurs, it is called urethritis. Besides the urethra, the urinary tract consists of the bladder, ureters, and kidneys. Inflammation can move up the urethra, causing cystitis in the bladder, or nephritis in the kidneys. Collectively, these inflammations are called urinary tract infections or UTIs. Urinary tract infections are much more common in women than in men, probably due to anatomy. Infections are especially more common in older women, due to bladder problems.

Causes and symptoms Uncomplicated urethritis usually results from infection by the bacteria Escherichia coli, commonly found in the bowel. Complicated urethritis can occur when other problems exist, such as kidney stones, malformations of the urinary tract, spinal cord injury, or a compromised immune system. People with diabetes tend to have more urinary tract infections, as well as hospitalized patients. Urinary tract infections can also be sexually transmitted. Some people seem to be susceptible to urinary tract infections, having them recurrently. Frequently, a urinary tract infection has no symptoms. Common symptoms though, include pain and a burning sensation when urinating, frequent urination, or passing blood in the urine. Signs that the infection may be worsening include fever and chills, nausea, vomiting, and lower back pain.

Diagnosis The diagnosis for a urinary tract infection is made by assessing the symptoms, feeling (palpating) the abdomen GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Uric acid tests

for tenderness, and a urinalysis. A urinalysis, or urine sample, is examined for both the presence of bacteria and white blood cells. After this, a urine culture to determine what bacteria is causing the infection may be done.

Treatment Typical treatment for urinary tract infections is a course of antibiotics. In women who have recurrent urethritis, the diagnosis and treatment is often resolved over the phone. Additional drugs are sometimes given to relieve discomfort.

Alternative treatment For those individuals who seem to be more susceptible to urinary tract infections, drinking lots of fluids at the first sign of an infection can ward it off by diluting the bacteria present and flushing the system. Adding a teaspoon of baking soda to a glass of water and drinking it can change the pH of the urine, causing it to burn less. Also, cranberry juice contains a compound that can prevent bacteria from sticking to and thus growing in the urinary tract. Antimicrobial herbs, such as uva ursi (Arctostaphylos uva-ursi) and pipsissewa (Chimaphila umbellata), may be helpful. Other herbs, such as marsh mallow (Althaea officinalis), slippery elm (Ulmus fulva), comfrey (Symphytum officinale), plantain (Plantago major), and cornsilk, can soothe the urinary tract. Lactobacillus acidophilus and L. bifidus supplementation reintroduces normal flora into the urinary tract. Acupuncture and homeopathy can also be effective therapies for urethritis.

A false color transmission electron micrograph (TEM) scan of non-specific urethritis. (Photograph by Dr. R. Dourmashkin, Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

• wear cotton underwear • rinse soap off well in the shower • urinate after sexual intercourse • for post-menopausal women, estrogen replacement therapy can help prevent urinary tract infection Resources

Prognosis Given the appropriate antibiotic, urinary tract infections usually go away quickly. If not treated soon enough, however, urethritis can move up the urinary tract, infecting the bladder and possibly the kidneys, resulting in kidney damage. If the infection moves into the blood, additional complications can arise. Those who have previously had a urinary tract infection are more susceptible to additional urinary tract infections. Because of this, patients need to be aware of the symptoms so that a physician can be notified if the infection becomes recurrent.

BOOKS

Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. PERIODICALS

“Drink Away Urinary Tract Infections.” Prevention Magazine, Jan. 1998, 135.

Cindy L. A. Jones, PhD

Prevention There are some steps that can be taken to keep the urinary tract healthy and prevent infection. • drink plenty of fluids; • do not hold urine once the urge to urinate has occurred; • after a bowel movement, wipe from front to rear to keep bowel bacteria at a distance; GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Uric acid tests Definition Uric acid tests are tests that are done to measure the levels of uric acid in blood serum or in urine. 3441

Uric acid tests

Purpose The uric acid tests are used to evaluate the blood levels of uric acid for gout and to assess uric acid levels in the urine for kidney stone formation. The urine test is used most often to monitor patients already diagnosed with kidney stones, but it can also be used to detect disorders that affect the body’s production of uric acid and to help measure the level of kidney functioning. Uric acid is a waste product that results from the breakdown of purine, a nucleic acid. (Nucleic acids are the building blocks of DNA.) Uric acid is made in the liver and excreted by the kidneys. If the liver produces too much uric acid or the kidneys excrete too little, the patient will have too much uric acid in the blood. This condition is called hyperuricemia. Supersaturated uric acid in the urine (uricosuria) can crystallize to form kidney stones that may block the tubes that lead from the kidneys to the bladder (the ureters).

Precautions Blood test Patients scheduled for a blood test for uric acid should be checked for the following medications: loop diuretics (Diamox, Bumex, Edecrin, or Lasix); ethambutol (Myambutol); vincristine (Oncovin); pyrazinamide (Tebrazid); thiazide diuretics (Naturetin, Hydrex, Diuril, Esidrix, HydroDiuril, Aquatensen, Renese, Diurese); aspirin (low doses); acetaminophen (Tylenol); ascorbic acid (vitamin C preparations); levodopa (Larodopa); or phenacetin. These drugs can affect test results. Certain foods that are high in purine may increase the patient’s levels of uric acid. These include kidneys, liver, sweetbreads, sardines, anchovies, and meat extracts.

tube. The procedure, which is called a venipuncture, takes about five minutes. The urine test requires the patient to collect all urine voided over a 24-hour period, with the exception of the very first specimen. The patient keeps the specimen container on ice or in the refrigerator during the collection period.

Preparation The uric acid test requires either a blood or urine sample. For the blood sample, the patient should be fasting (nothing to eat or drink) for at least eight hours before the test. The urine test for uric acid requires a 24hour urine collection. The urine test does not require the patient to fast or cut down on fluids. Some laboratories encourage patients to drink plenty of fluids during the collection period.

Risks Risks for the blood test are minimal, but may include slight bleeding from the puncture site, a small bruise or swelling in the area, or fainting or feeling lightheaded.

Normal results Blood test Reference values for blood uric acid vary from laboratory to laboratory but are generally found within the following range: Male: 2.1–8.5 mg/dL; female: 2.0–6.6 mg/dL. Values may be slightly higher in the elderly. Urine test Reference values for 24-hour urinary uric acid vary from laboratory to laboratory but are generally found within the following range: 250–750 mg/24 hours.

Urine test Patients should be checked for the following medications before the urine test: diuretics, aspirin, pyrazinamide (Tebrazid), phenylbutazone, probenecid (Benemid), and allopurinol (Lopurin). If the patient needs to continue taking these medications, the laboratory should be notified. The laboratory should also be notified if the patient has had recent x-ray tests requiring contrast dyes. These chemicals increase uric acid levels in urine and decrease them in blood.

Description The uric acid blood test is performed on a sample of the patient’s blood, withdrawn from a vein into a vacuum 3442

Abnormal results The critical value for the blood test is a level of uric acid higher than 12 milligrams per deciliter (about 3.4 ounces). Increased production of uric acid may result from eating foods that are high in purine. Increased uric acid levels due to overproduction may also be caused by gout, by a genetic disorder of purine metabolism, or by metastatic cancer, destruction of red blood cells, leukemia, or cancer chemotherapy. Decreased excretion of uric acid is seen in chronic kidney disease, low thyroid, toxemia of pregnancy, and alcoholism. Patients with gout excrete less than half the uric acid in their blood as other persons. Only 10-15% of the total cases of hyperuricemia, however, are caused by gout. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Fanconi’s syndrome—A rare disorder caused by vitamin D deficiency or exposure to heavy metals. Gout—A metabolic disorder characterized by sudden recurring attacks of arthritis caused by deposits of crystals that build up in the joints due to abnormally high uric acid blood levels. In gout, uric acid may be overproduced, underexcreted, or both. Hyperuricemia—Excessively high levels of uric acid in the blood, often producing gout. Purine—A white crystalline substance that is one of the building blocks of DNA. Uric acid is produced when purine is broken down in the body. Uric acid—A compound resulting from the body’s breakdown of purine. It is normally present in human urine only in small amounts. Uricosuria—Increased levels of uric acid in the urine. Wilson’s disease—A rare hereditary disease marked by the buildup of copper in the liver and brain, causing loss of kidney function.

Abnormally low uric acid levels may indicate that the patient is taking allopurinol or probenecid for treatment of gout; may be pregnant; or suffers from Wilson’s disease or Fanconi’s syndrome. Resources BOOKS

Jacobs, David S., et al. Laboratory Test Handbook. 4th ed. New York: Lexi-Comp Inc., 1996. Pagana, Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1998. Cahill, Mathew. Handbook of Diagnostic Tests. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1995.

Janis O. Flores

Urinalysis Definition Urinalysis is a diagnostic physical, chemical, and microscopic examination of a urine sample (specimen). Specimens can be obtained by normal emptying of the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Purpose Urinalyses are performed for several reasons: • general evaluation of health • diagnosis of metabolic or systemic diseases that affect kidney function • diagnosis of endocrine disorders. Twenty-four-hour urine studies are often ordered for these tests • diagnosis of diseases or disorders of the kidneys or urinary tract • monitoring of patients with diabetes • testing for pregnancy • screening for drug abuse

Precautions Voided specimens Urinalysis should not be performed while a woman is menstruating or having a vaginal discharge. A woman who must have a urinalysis while she has a vaginal discharge or is having her period should insert a fresh tampon before beginning the test. She should also hold a piece of clean material over the entrance to her vagina to avoid contaminating the specimen. Patients do not have to fast or change their food intake before a urine test. They should, however, avoid intense athletic training or heavy physical work before the test because it may result in small amounts of blood in the urine. The following drugs can affect urinalysis results. The patient may be asked to stop taking them until after the test: • Nitrofurantoin (Macrodantin, Furadantin). Nitrofurantoin is prescribed for infections of the urinary tract and other bacterial infections. • Phenazopyridine (Pyridium). This medication is used to relieve burning and pain caused by urinary-tract infections. • Rifampin (Rifadin). This medication is prescribed to treat tuberculosis, prevent the spread of meningitis, and treat other infections. Bladder catheterization Bladder catheterization is sometimes used to collect urine samples from hospitalized patients. It should not, however, be used to collect specimens from males with 3443

Urinalysis

bladder (voiding) or by a hospital procedure called catheterization.

Urinalysis

acute inflammation of the prostate or from a patient of either sex with a fractured pelvis.

Description Collecting a urine sample from emptying the bladder takes about two or three minutes. The sample can be collected at home as well as in a doctor’s office. Urine specimens are usually collected early in the morning before breakfast. Urine collected eight hours after eating and at least six hours after the most recent urination is more likely to indicate abnormalities. Some people may be asked to void into a clean container before getting out of bed in the morning. Specimen containers The doctor or hospital will supply a sterile container for a specimen being collected for a colony count. A colony count is a test that detects bacteria in urine that has been cultured for 24–48 hours. It is used instead of a routine urinalysis when a patient’s symptoms suggest a urinary tract infection. Nonsterile containers can be used for routine specimens that will not be tested immediately after being collected. An ordinary open-necked jar may be used after it and its lid have been soaked in very hot water for 15–20 minutes and then air-dried. Laboratory procedures STORAGE. Urine specimens should not remain unrefrigerated for longer than two hours. A urine specimen that cannot be delivered to a laboratory within two hours should be stored in a refrigerator. The reason for this precaution is that urine samples undergo chemical changes at room temperature. Blood cells begin to dissolve and the urine loses its acidity. VISUAL EXAMINATION. A doctor, nurse, or laboratory technician will look at the specimen to see if the urine is red, cloudy, or looks unusual in any way. He or she will also note any unusual odor. TESTING TECHNIQUES. Urine samples are tested with a variety of different instruments and techniques. Some tests use dipsticks, which are thin strips of plastic that change color in the presence of specific substances. Dipsticks can be used to measure the acidity of the urine (its pH) or the presence of blood, protein, sugar, or substances produced during the breakdown of fatty acids (ketones). A urinometer is used to compare the density of the urine specimen with the density of plain water. This measurement is called specific gravity.

The urine specimen is also examined under a microscope to determine whether it contains blood cells, crystals, or small pieces of fibrous material (casts). 3444

Preparation Voided specimens Most urine specimens from adults or older children are collected by the patient’s voiding into a suitable container. Soaps and disinfectants may contaminate urine specimens and should not be used. The doctor or laboratory may supply a special antiseptic solution that won’t irritate the skin. The method for collection varies somewhat according to age and sex. WOMEN AND GIRLS. Before collecting a urine sample, a woman or girl should use a clean cotton ball moistened with lukewarm water to cleanse the external genital area. Gently separating the folded skin (labia) on either side of her vagina, she should move the cotton ball from the front of the area to the back. After repeating this process several times, using a fresh piece of cotton each time, she should dry the area with a clean towel.

To prevent menstrual blood, vaginal discharge, or germs from the external genitalia from contaminating the specimen, a woman or girl should release some urine before she begins to collect her sample. A urine specimen obtained this way is called a midstream clean catch. MEN AND BOYS. A man or boy should use a piece of clean cotton, moistened with antiseptic, to cleanse the head of his penis and the passage through which urine leaves his body (the urethral meatus). He should draw back his foreskin if he has not been circumcised. He should move the cotton in a circular motion away from the urinary opening, using a fresh piece of cotton each time. After repeating this process several times, he should use a fresh piece of cotton to remove the antiseptic. After the area has been thoroughly cleansed, he should begin urinating and collect a small sample in a container without interrupting the stream of urine. INFANTS. A parent, nurse, or doctor should cleanse the child’s genitals and as much of the surrounding area as will fit into the sterile urine-collection bag provided by the hospital. When the area has been thoroughly cleansed, the bag should be attached to the child’s genital area and left in place until the child has urinated. It is important to remember not to touch the inside of the bag and to remove it as soon as a specimen has been obtained.

Bladder catheterization Bladder catheterization is a hospital procedure used to collect uncontaminated urine when the patient cannot void. A catheter is a thin flexible tube that the doctor inserts through the urethra into the bladder to GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Suprapubic bladder aspiration is a technique that is sometimes used to collect urine from infants younger than six months. The doctor withdraws urine from the bladder into a syringe through a needle inserted through the skin over the bladder. This technique is used only when the child cannot void because of an abnormal urethra or if he or she has a urinary tract infection that has not responded to treatment.

Aftercare The patient may return to normal activities after collecting the sample and may start taking medications that were discontinued before the test.

Risks There are no risks associated with voided specimens. The risk of bladder infection from catheterization with a Robinson catheter is about 3%.

Odor Foul-smelling urine is a common symptom of urinary-tract infection. A fruity odor is associated with diabetes mellitus, starvation and dehydration, or ketone formation. Other distinctive odors are present in the urine of patients with maple syrup urine disease or phenylketonuria (PKU). Specific gravity The specific gravity of urine can be affected by a range of diseases and disorders. Low specific gravity (below 1.005) is associated with diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, acute tubular necrosis, and inflammation of the upper urinary tract (pyelonephritis). In fixed specific gravity, the specific gravity of the urine remains at 1.010 no matter how much fluid the person drinks. This condition occurs in patients who have chronic inflammation of the small blood vessels in the kidneys (glomerulonephritis) and serious kidney damage. High specific gravity (above 1.035) occurs in patients who are in shock or who suffer from nephrotic syndrome, dehydration, acute glomerulonephritis, congestive heart failure, or liver failure. pH

Normal results Contents and appearance Normal urine is a clear straw-colored liquid. It has a slight odor. It contains some crystals, a small number of cells from the tissues that line the bladder, and transparent (hyaline) casts. Normal urine does not contain sugars, yeast cells, protein, ketones, bacteria, or parasitic organisms. The time of day a urine sample is collected can make a difference in the appearance of the specimen. Some foods and medicines, including red beets, asparagus, and penicillin, can affect the color or smell of urine. Although most color variations are harmless, they sometimes indicate the presence of serious disease. A doctor, nurse, or laboratory technician should be notified if the urine is red or cloudy or looks unusual in any way. Acidity The pH of normal urine is 4.5–8.0. Its specific gravity is 1.0005–1.035.

Abnormal results Cloudiness Urine may be cloudy (turbid) because it contains red or white blood cells, bacteria, fat, mucus, digestive fluid (chyle), or pus from a bladder or kidney infection. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

A pH factor greater than 7 (more alkaline) may result from Fanconi’s syndrome, urinary tract infections, or metabolic or respiratory alkalosis. A pH factor below 7 (more acid) may be due to fever, PKU, the secretion of homogentisic acid in the urine (alkaptonuria), and acidosis. Blood and tissue cells Red blood cells in the urine can be due to vigorous exercise or exposure to toxic chemicals. Bloody urine can also be a sign of bleeding in the genitourinary tract as a result of systemic bleeding disorders, various kidney diseases, bacterial infections, parasitic infections including malaria, obstructions in the urinary tract, scurvy, subacute bacterial endocarditis, traumatic injuries, and tumors. A high number of white blood cells in the urine is usually a symptom of urinary tract infection. A large number of cells from tissue lining (epithelial cells) can indicate damage to the small tubes that carry material into and out of the kidneys. Casts Casts are small fibrous objects that are formed when protein and other materials settle in the kidney tubules and collecting ducts. Casts are dislodged by normal urine flow. A large number of them in a urine specimen is a sign of kidney disease. 3445

Urinalysis

allow urine to flow out. To minimize the risk of infecting the patient’s bladder with bacteria, many doctors use a so-called Robinson catheter, which is a plain rubber or latex tube that is removed as soon as the specimen is collected.

Urinalysis

KEY TERMS Acidosis—A condition of the blood in which bicarbonate levels are below normal. Alkalosis—A condition of the blood and other body fluids in which bicarbonate levels are higher than normal. Casts—Small fibrous objects formed from materials that collect in the kidney tubules and are washed out by normal urine flow. Catheter—A thin flexible tube inserted through the urethra into the bladder to allow urine to flow out. Clean catch specimen—A urine specimen that is collected from the middle of the urine stream after the first part of the flow has been voided.

Ketones—Substances produced during the breakdown of fatty acids. They are produced in excessive amounts in diabetes and certain other abnormal conditions. Nephrotic syndrome—A condition characterized by water retention, little or no protein in urine, and high blood cholesterol. pH—A chemical symbol used to describe the acidity or alkalinity of a fluid, ranging from 0 (more acid) to 14 (more alkaline). Urethra—The duct that carries urine from the bladder to the outside of the body.

Colony count—A measurement of the growth of bacteria in a urine sample that has been cultured for 24 to 48 hours.

Urinalysis (plural, urinalyses)—The diagnostic testing of a urine sample.

Fanconi’s syndrome—A rare disorder caused by vitamin D deficiency or exposure to heavy metals.

Voiding—Another word for emptying the bladder or urinating.

Crystals There are several different chemicals in body fluids that can form crystals that appear in urine. Some of these appear in normal urine, such as calcium oxalate or uric acid crystals. A large number of calcium oxalate crystals, however, may be a sign of abnormally high levels of calcium in the blood (hypercalcemia). Other crystals, including tyrosine, leucine, and cholesterol, are abnormal. The presence of cystine crystals is a symptom of excessive urinary secretion of cystine (cystinuria). Cystine is an acid found in many proteins and normally reabsorbed by the kidney tubules. Protein Protein in the urine can be a symptom of kidney stones, inflammation of the kidneys, degenerative kidney disease, or multiple tumors. Sugars A high level of glucose and other sugars in the urine (glycosuria) is often a symptom of diabetes mellitus. Glycosuria can also be caused by advanced kidney disease, Cushing’s syndrome, impaired tubular reabsorption, shock, a rare tumor of the adrenal gland (pheochromocytoma), or cancer of the pancreas. Milk in the urine is normal if a woman is pregnant, has just given birth, or is breastfeeding. On the other 3446

hand, rare hereditary metabolic disorders are indicated when urine contains fruit sugar (fructose), milk sugar (galactose), or a simple sugar called pentose. Ketones The presence of abnormally high numbers of ketones in the urine (ketonuria) usually results from uncontrolled diabetes mellitus. Ketonuria can also be caused by prolonged diarrhea or vomiting that results in starvation. Bilirubin Bilirubin is an orange-yellow pigment found in bile, a fluid secreted by the liver. When it is found in urine, bilirubin may be a symptom of liver disease caused by the formation of fibrous tissue, medications that damage the liver, or obstructive jaundice. Urobilinogen Bacteria in the small intestine can convert bilirubin to urobilinogen, which is excreted in the feces, in bile, or in urine. An accumulation of urobilinogen in the urine may be a sign of severe infection, liver damage, or diseases that destroy red blood cells. Low levels of urobilinogen in the urine may be a result of antimicrobial therapy, inflammatory diseases, kidney disease, severe diarrhea, or blocked bile ducts. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The presence of bacteria, parasites, or yeast cells in the urine may be a symptom of urinary tract infection or contamination of the external genitalia. Other factors that may affect urinalysis results include failure to collect a specimen during the day’s first voiding; frequent urination; large dietary intake of vitamin C; and urine with a pH value lower than 6. Resources BOOKS

“Laboratory Diagnosis: Urine Studies.” In Clinician’s Pocket Reference, ed. Leonard G. Gomella. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1993. ORGANIZATIONS

American Association of Kidney Patients. 100 S. Ashley Dr., #280, Tampa, FL 33602. (800) 749-2257. . American Kidney Fund. 6110 Executive Boulevard, Rockville, MD 20852. (800) 638-8299. . National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Information Clearinghouse (NKUDIC). 3 Information Way, Bethesda, MD 20892-3580. (800) 891-5388. .

Maureen Haggerty

Urinary anti-infectives Definition Urinary anti-infectives are medicines used to treat or prevent infections of the urinary tract—the passage through which urine flows from the kidneys out of the body.

Purpose Normally, no bacteria or other disease-causing organisms live in the bladder. Likewise, the urethra—the tubelike structure that carries urine from the bladder out of the body—usually has either no bacteria or not enough to cause problems. But the bladder, urethra, and other parts of the urinary tract may become infected when disease-causing organisms invade from other body regions or from outside the body. Urinary anti-infectives are used to treat such infections or to prevent them in people who get them often.

Description Commonly used urinary anti-infectives include methenamine (Urex, Hiprex, Mandelamine), nalidixic GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

acid (NegGram) and nitrofurantoin (Macrobid, Furatoin, and other brands). These medicines are available only with a physician’s prescription and come in capsule, tablet, granule, and liquid forms.

Recommended dosage Methenamine For adults and children 12 years and over, the usual dosage is 1 gram, taken either twice a day or four times a day, depending on the form in which the drug comes. For children aged 6–12 years, the dosage ranges from 500 mg taken 2–4 times a day to 1 gram taken twice a day, again depending on the form of the drug. For children under 6 years, a physician must determine the dose. This medicine will not work properly unless the urine is acidic, with a pH reading of 5.5 or below. The physician who prescribes the medicine will explain how to test the urine’s acidity. The physician also may suggest diet changes that will make the urine more acidic, such as eating more protein, drinking cranberry juice, eating plums and prunes, but avoiding most other fruits, and cutting down on milk and other dairy products. Antacids also should be avoided. Nalidixic acid The recommended dosage for adults and children 12 years and older is 1 gram every 6 hours. If the medicine is taken for more than one or two weeks, the dosage may be decreased to 500 mg every 6 hours. A physician must determine the correct dosage for children 3 months to 12 years old. Children under 3 months should not take this medicine because it causes bone problems in young animals and could have the same effect in young children. Nitrofurantoin CAPSULES, TABLETS, OR LIQUID. The usual dose for adults and teenagers is 50–100 mg every six hours. EXTENDED-RELEASE CAPSULES. For adults and children 12 years and older, the usual dosage is 100 mg every 12 hours for seven days.

For all forms of nitrofurantoin, a physician must determine the correct dose for children one month and older, based on the child’s body weight. Children under one month should not take this medicine.

Precautions Methenamine People with certain medical conditions may have problems if they take this medicine. For example, people 3447

Urinary anti-infectives

Other findings

Urinary anti-infectives

with severe liver disease may have worsened symptoms of their disease. And people who are dehydrated or who have severe kidney disease may be more likely to have side effects that affect the kidneys. Nalidixic acid Some people feel drowsy, dizzy, or less alert than usual when using this drug. The medicine may also cause blurred vision or other vision changes. Because of these possible problems, anyone who takes nalidixic acid should not drive, operate machinery, or do anything else that might be dangerous until they have found out how the drugs affect them. Nalidixic acid may increase sensitivity to sunlight. Even brief exposure to sun can cause a severe sunburn or a rash. While being treated with this medicine, avoid being in direct sunlight, especially between 10 a.m. and 3 p.m.; wear a hat and tightly woven clothing that covers the arms and legs; use a sunscreen with a skin protection factor (SPF) of at least 15; protect the lips with a sun block lipstick; and do not use tanning beds, tanning booths, or sunlamps. Diabetic patients should be aware that this medicine may cause false results on some urine sugar tests. Check with a physician before making any changes in diet or diabetes medicine based on the results of a urine test. In laboratory studies, nalidixic acid interferes with bone development in young animals. The drug’s effects have not been studied in pregnant women, but because of its effects in animals, it is not recommended for use during pregnancy. This medicine generally does not cause problems in nursing babies whose mothers take it. However, nursing babies with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency (an inherited disorder that affects mainly black males) may have blood problems if their mothers take nalidixic acid. People with certain medical conditions may be more likely to have particular side effects if they take this medicine. For example, people with a history of seizures or severe hardening of the arteries in the brain may be more likely to have side effects that affect the nervous system. People with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency are more likely to have side effects that affect the blood. Also, people with liver disease or severe kidney disease have an increased chance of having any of the drug’s possible side effects. Nitrofurantoin Pregnant women should not take this medicine within two weeks of their delivery date and should not use it during labor and delivery, as this could cause problems in the baby. 3448

Women who are breastfeeding should check with their physicians before using this medicine. It passes into breast milk and could cause problems in nursing babies whose mothers take it. This is especially true of babies with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency. The medicine also should not be given directly to babies up to one month of age, as they are particularly sensitive to its effects. Older people may be more likely to have side effects when taking nitrofurantoin, because they are more sensitive to the drug’s effects. Taking nitrofurantoin may cause problems for people with certain medical conditions. Side effects may be greater, for example, in people with lung disease or nerve damage. In people with kidney disease, the medicine may not work as well as it should, but may cause more side effects. Those with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency who take nitrofurantoin may develop anemia. Diabetic patients should be aware that this medicine may cause false results on some urine sugar tests. They should check with a physician before making any changes in diet or diabetes medicine based on the results of a urine test. General precautions for all urinary anti-infectives Symptoms should improve within a few days of starting to take a urinary anti-infective. If they do not, or if they become worse, check with a physician right away. Patients who need to take this medicine for long periods should see their physicians regularly, so that the physician can check their progress. Anyone who has had unusual reactions to urinary anti-infectives in the past should let his or her physician know before taking the drugs again. The physician should also be told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances. Patients taking nalidixic acid should tell their physicians if they have ever had reactions to related medicines such as cinoxacin (Cinobac), ciprofloxacin (Cipro), enoxacin (Penetrex), norfloxacin (Noroxin) or ofloxacin (Floxin), all of which are also used to treat or prevent infections. Anyone taking nitrofurantoin should let the physician know if he or she has had an unusual reaction to medicines such as furazolidone (Furoxone) or nitrofurazone (Furacin).

Side effects Methenamine Nausea and vomiting are not common but may occur. These side effects do not need medical attention unless GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Nalidixic acid Some side effects are fairly minor and are likely to go away as the body adjusts to the drug. These include dizziness, drowsiness, headache, nausea or vomiting, stomach pain and diarrhea. Unless these problems continue or are bothersome, they do not need medical attention. Other side effects, however, should have prompt medical attention. Anyone who has changes in vision, such as blurred vision, double vision, decreased vision, changes in color vision, halos around lights, or notices an excessive brightness of lights should check with a physician immediately. Nitrofurantoin This medicine may make the urine turn reddish-yellow to brown. This is nothing to worry about. Other possible side effects that do not need medical attention unless they are severe include pain in the stomach or abdomen, stomach upset, diarrhea, loss of appetite, and nausea or vomiting. Anyone who has chest pain, breathing problems, fever, chills, or a cough while taking nitrofurantoin should check with a physician immediately. General advice on side effects for all urinary antiinfectives Other side effects are possible when taking any urinary anti-infective. Anyone who has unusual symptoms while taking this type of medicine should get in touch with his or her physician.

KEY TERMS Altitude sickness—A set of symptoms that people who normally live at low altitudes may have when they travel to high altitudes. The symptoms include nosebleed, nausea, and shortness of breath. Anemia—A lack of hemoglobin—the compound in blood that carries oxygen from the lungs throughout the body and brings waste carbon dioxide from the cells to the lungs, where it is released. Bacteria—Tiny, one-celled forms of life that cause many diseases and infections. Glaucoma—A condition in which pressure in the eye is abnormally high. If not treated, glaucoma may lead to blindness. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency—An inherited disorder in which the body lacks an enzyme that normally protects red blood cells from toxic chemicals. When people with this condition take certain drugs, their red blood cells break down, causing anemia. This may also happen when they have a fever or an infection. The condition usually occurs in males. About 10% of black males have it, as do a small percentage of people from the Mediterranean region. Granule—A small grain or pellet. Medicines that come in granule form usually are mixed with liquids or sprinkled on food before they are taken. Organism—An individual of some type of life form, such as a plant or an animal. pH—A measure of how acidic or alkaline something is. The pH scale ranges from 0 to 14. Values below 7 are acidic; values above 7 are alkaline. Seizure—A sudden attack, spasm, or convulsion.

Interactions Methenamine Certain medicines may make methenamine less effective. These include thiazide diuretics (water pills) and medicines that make the urine less acid, such as antacids, bicarbonate of soda, and the drugs acetazolamide (Diamox), dichlorphenamide (Daranide), and methazolamide (Neptazane), which are used to treat glaucoma, epilepsy, altitude sickness, and other conditions. Nalidixic acid People who are taking blood thinners (anticoagulants) may be more likely to have bleeding problems if they take this medicine. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Nitrofurantoin Nitrofurantoin may interact with many other medicines. For example, taking nitrofurantoin with certain drugs that include methyldopa (Aldomet), sulfonamides (sulfa drugs), vitamin K, and diabetes medicines taken by mouth may increase the chance of side effects that affect the blood. General side effects are more likely in people who take nitrofurantoin with the gout drugs probenecid (Benemid) or sulfinpyrazone (Anturane). And the risk of side effects that involve the nervous system is higher in people who take nitrofurantoin with various drugs including lithium (Lithane), disulfiram (Antabuse), other anti-infectives, and the cancer drugs 3449

Urinary anti-infectives

they are severe. One side effect that should be brought to a physician’s attention immediately is a skin rash.

Urinary catheterization

cisplatin (Platinol) and vincristine (Oncovin). Patients who have had a DPT (diphtheria, tetanus, and pertussis) vaccine within the last 30 days or who have one after taking nitrofurantoin are also more likely to have side effects that affect the nervous system. Because of the many possible interactions, anyone taking nitrofurantoin should be sure to check with a physician before combining it with any other medicine. General advice about interactions Not every drug that may interact with a urinary antiinfective is listed here. Be sure to check with a physician or pharmacist before combining a urinary anti-infective with any other prescription or nonprescription (over-thecounter) medicine. Resources PERIODICALS

Tucker, M. Susan. “Recurrent UTI: Who Should Treat Herself?” Patient Care 26 (15 July 1992): 259.

Nancy Ross-Flanigan

Urinary antiseptics see Urinary anti-infectives

Urinary catheterization Definition Urinary catheterization is the insertion of a catheter into a patient’s bladder. The catheter is used as a conduit to drain urine from the bladder into an attached bag or container.

Purpose Urinary catheterization is employed in hospital and nursing home settings to maintain urine output in patients who are undergoing surgery, or who are confined to the bed and physically unable to use a bedpan. Critically ill patients who require strict monitoring of urinary output are also frequently catheterized. Intermittent insertion of a urinary catheter is a treatment option for patients with certain types of urinary incontinence. Patients who are unable to completely empty the bladder during urination (urinary retention), or patients who have a bladder obstruction, may also require intermittent urinary catheterization. Disabled individuals with neurological disorders that cause paralysis or a loss of sensation in the perineal area may also use regular intermittent catheter insertion to void their bladders. 3450

Precautions Because urinary catheterization carries a risk of causing urinary tract infection (UTI), precautions should be used to keep the catheter clean and free of bacteria. Patients requiring intermittent catheterization should be well trained in the technique by a qualified health care professional.

Description Intermittent catheterization is performed a minimum of four times a day by the patient or a care giver. The genital area near the urethral opening is wiped with an antiseptic agent, such as iodine. A lubricant may be used to facilitate the entry of the catheter into the urethra, and a topical local anesthetic may be applied to numb the urethral opening during the procedure. One end of the catheter is placed in a container, and the other end is inserted into and guided up the urethra until urine flow begins. When urine flow stops, the catheter may be moved or rotated, or the patient may change positions to ensure that all urine has emptied from the bladder. The catheter is then withdrawn, cleaned, and sterilized for the next use. Recommended cleaning practices vary, from the use of soap and water to submersion in boiling water or a disinfectant solution. Some patients prefer to use a new catheter with each insertion. Nonintermittent catheterization, which is initiated in a hospital or nursing home setting, uses the same basic technique for insertion of the urinary tract catheter. The catheter is inserted by a nurse or other health care professional, and remains in the patient until bladder function can be maintained independently. When the catheter is removed, patients will experience a pulling sensation and may feel some minor discomfort. If the catheter is required for an extended period of time, a long-term, indwelling catheter, such as a Foley catheter, is used. To prevent infection, it should be regularly exchanged for a new catheter every three to six weeks. Use of indwelling catheters should be restricted to patients whose incontinence is caused by urinary tract obstruction that can not be treated, and for which alternative therapy is not feasible.

Preparation If a patient wishes to perform intermittent catheterization himself, training in the technique by a qualified health care professional is required. Basic instruction in the anatomy, antiseptic techniques, catheter insertion, and proper catheter care should be provided. Patients learning chronic intermittent urinary catheterization may also benefit from an ultrasound examination to verify that they are completely emptying their bladder during the procedure. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Bladder obstruction—A blockage of the bladder caused by the presence of calculi (e.g., mineral deposits) or an anatomic abnormality. Catheter—A long, thin, flexible tube. Foley catheter—A two-channel catheter with a balloon on the bladder end of one channel. Once inflated, the balloon keeps the catheter securely in the bladder. The other channel of the catheter facilitates the flow of urine out of the bladder. Local anesthetic—Medication applied topically to the skin or administered through an injection that deadens a specific part of the body and inhibits the sensation of pain.

When used correctly, catheterization facilitates complete voiding of the bladder. Resources PERIODICALS

Hunt, Gillian M., Pippa Oakeshott, and Robert Whitaker. “Intermittent Catheterization: Simple, Safe, and Effective but Underused.” British Medical Journal 312, no. 7023 (Jan. 1996): 103-7. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Agency for Health Care Policy and Research. “Urinary Incontinence in Adults: Acute and Chronic Management.” Clinical Practice Guideline no. 2 (1996).

Paula Anne Ford-Martin

Perineal area—The genital area between the vulva and anus in a woman, and between the scrotum and anus in a man. Ultrasound examination—A diagnostic test that uses sound waves to generate a picture of an organ or organ system. Urinary incontinence—The inability to control one’s urine flow.

Aftercare Patients using intermittent catheterization as a treatment for incontinence will experience a period of adjustment as they try to establish a catheterization schedule that is adequate for their normal level of fluid intake. Antibiotics may be prescribed as a preventative measure in long-term urinary catheterization patients who are at risk for urinary tract infection. A patient with an indwelling catheter must be reassessed periodically to determine whether alternative treatment may be more effective in treating the problem.

Risks Trauma to the urethra and/or bladder may result from incorrect insertion of the catheter. Repeated irritation to the urethra during catheter insertion may cause scarring and/or stricture, or narrowing, of the urethra. The catheter may introduce bacteria into the urethra and bladder, resulting in urinary tract infection. UTI can cause fever and inflammation of the bladder and urethra. Patients who practice intermittent catheterization can reduce their risks for UTI by using antiseptic techniques for insertion and catheter care. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Urinary diversion surgery Definition A urinary diversion involves removal of the urinary bladder and adjacent tissues and organs, and re-routing of the urinary stream. This may involve creation of an artificial opening in the abdomen called an ostomy.

Purpose A urinary diversion is created as a means to treat cancer of the bladder, when conservative measures have been unsuccessful, or when there is recurrence of the disease invading the muscle wall. Congenital deformities or traumatic injury may also necessitate formation of a urinary diversion.

Description Under general anesthesia, an incision is made in the abdomen. The ureters (tubes that carry urine away from the kidneys) are cut and tied. The bladder and surrounding tissues are cut free and removed. The ureters are then attached to a portion of the intestine. The most common types of urinary diversion are: • Ileal conduit. Ureters are attached to a portion of the small intestine, the ileum, one end of which is brought through the abdominal wall as a conduit for the urine, creating a stoma. • Ureterosigmoidostomy. The ureters are attached to a portion of the large intestine, the sigmoid, which allows the urine to flow through the large intestine and out through the rectum. 3451

Urinary diversion surgery

Normal results

Urinary diversion surgery

• Cutaneous ureterostomy. Bringing the detached ureters through the abdominal wall and attaching it to an opening in the skin. Following creation of an artificial opening to drain the urine, ureteral stents (tubes that go through the stoma and up into the ureters) are often inserted and left in place to allow urine to drain freely from the kidneys, without risk of blockage from swelling due to surgery. The muscles are replaced and sewn together. A transparent pouch is applied to the abdomen to collect urine, and attached to a bedside drainage bag. The incision is closed with sutures or clips (“staples”), which are usually removed about 1 week after surgery. An alternative to a conventional urinary diversion is the continent urinary diversion. In this surgical procedure, a “false bladder” is constructed within the abdomen, using several lengths of small or large intestine. The ureters are sewn to this new reservoir for urine and nipple valves are created at two sites; the abdominal wall for continence; and where the ureters are implanted, to prevent reflux of urine back to the kidneys. The patient is then taught to catheterize the reservoir to drain urine at regular intervals during the day. Although a continent diversion is not suitable for every patient who requires urinary diversion, it is an option to be considered.

Preparation As with any surgical procedure, the patient will be required to sign a consent form after the procedure is explained thoroughly. Blood and urine studies, along with various x rays and an electrocardiogram (EKG), may be ordered as the doctor deems necessary. If creation of an ostomy is planned, the patient should visit an enterostomal therapist, who will mark an appropriate place on the abdomen for a stoma and offer preoperative education on ostomy management. Eating or drinking is prohibited after midnight the night before the surgery. Oral anti-infectives, such as neomycin, erythromycin, or kanamycin sulfate, may be ordered to decrease bacteria in the intestine and help prevent postoperative infection. A nasogastric tube is inserted the day of surgery, or during surgery, to remove gastric secretions and prevent nausea and vomiting.

Aftercare Postoperative care for the patient with a urinary diversion, as with those who have had any major surgery, involves monitoring of blood pressure, pulse, respirations, and temperature. Breathing tends to be shallow because of the effect of anesthesia, and the patient is reluctant to breathe deeply and experience pain that is caused by the 3452

abdominal incision. The patient is shown how to support the operative site during deep breathing and coughing, and is given pain medication as necessary. Fluid intake and output are measured, and the operative site is observed for color and amount of wound drainage. The nasogastric tube will remain in place, attached to low intermittent suction, until bowel activity resumes. Fluids and electrolytes are infused intravenously until the patient’s diet can gradually be resumed, beginning with liquids. The patient is usually able to move about in 8–24 hours after surgery, and is discharged from the hospital in 5–10 days. If an ostomy has been placed, the patient and close family members will be educated on how to care for it. Determination of appropriate pouching supplies and a schedule of how often to change the pouch should be established. Regular assessment and meticulous care of the skin surrounding the stoma is important to maintain an adequate surface on which to apply the pouch. The pouch should be connected to a bedside drainage bag at night to prevent large volumes of urine from collecting in the pouch. Otherwise, the weight of the pouch could cause disruption of the pouch seal and leakage of urine onto the surrounding skin. Often, an enterostomal therapist will visit the patient at home after discharge to help the new ostomy patient make the transition back to normal daily activities.

Risks Potential complications of urinary diversion surgery include: • excessive bleeding • surgical wound infection • thrombophlebitis (inflammation and blood clot to veins in the legs) • pneumonia • pulmonary embolism (blood clot or air bubble in the lungs’ blood supply)

Normal results Complete healing is expected without complications. The amount of time required for recovery from the surgery may vary depending of the patient’s overall health status prior to surgery. The patient with a urinary diversion, without other medical complications, should be able to resume all daily activities once recovered from the surgery.

Abnormal results The doctor should be made aware of any of the following problems after surgery: GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

OTHER

Ischemia— A compromise in blood supply to body tissues that causes tissue damage or death.

“Bladder Removal.” ThriveOnline. 20 Apr. 1998 .

Ostomy—A surgically-created opening in the abdomen for elimination of waste products (urine or stool).

Kathleen D. Wright, RN

Urinary incontinence • Increased pain, swelling, redness, drainage, or bleeding in the surgical area • Headache, muscle aches, dizziness, or fever • Increased abdominal pain or swelling, constipation, nausea, or vomiting.

Definition Urinary incontinence is unintentional loss of urine that is sufficient enough in frequency and amount to cause physical and/or emotional distress in the person experiencing it.

Stomal complications to be monitored include: • Stomal tissue death (necrosis). This occurs because of inadequate blood supply, this is usually visible 12 to 24 hours after surgery. It may require additional surgery. • Stoma flush or below the abdomen surface (retraction). Caused by insufficient stomal length, this may be managed by use of special pouching supplies. Elective revision of the stoma is also an option. • Narrowing at the opening of the stoma (stenosis). Often associated with infection around the stoma or scarring, mild stenosis can be removed under local anesthesia. Severe stenosis may require surgery for stomal revision. • Parastomal hernia. The bowel causes a bulge in the abdominal wall next to the stoma. This is usually due to placement of the stoma where the abdominal wall is weak, or an overly large opening in the abdominal wall. Use of an ostomy support belt and special pouching supplies may be adequate. If severe, the defect in the abdominal wall should be repaired and the stoma moved to another location. Resources BOOKS

Doughty, Dorothy. Urinary and Fecal Incontinence. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, Inc., 1991. Hampton, Beverly, and Ruth Bryant. Ostomies and Continent Diversions. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, Inc., 1992. Monahan, Frances. Medical-Surgical Nursing. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998. Suddarth, Doris. The Lippincott Manual of Nursing. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1991. ORGANIZATIONS

United Ostomy Association, Inc. (UOA). 19772 MacArthur Blvd., Suite 200, Irvine, CA 92612-2405. (800) 826-0826. . GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Description Approximately 13 million Americans suffer from urinary incontinence. Women are affected by the disorder more frequently than are men; one in 10 women under age 65 suffer from urinary incontinence. Older Americans, too, are more prone to the condition. Twenty percent of Americans over age 65 are incontinent. There are five major categories of urinary incontinence: overflow, stress, urge, functional, and reflex. • Overflow incontinence. Overflow incontinence is caused by bladder dysfunction. Individuals with this type of incontinence have an obstruction to the bladder or urethra, or a bladder that doesn’t contract properly. As a result, their bladders do not empty completely, and they have problems with frequent urine leakage. • Stress incontinence. Stress incontinence occurs when an individual involuntarily loses urine after pressure is placed on the abdomen (i.e., during exercise, sexual activity, sneezing, coughing, laughing, or hugging). • Urge incontinence. Urge incontinence occurs when an individual feels a sudden need to urinate, and cannot control the urge to do so. As a consequence, urine is involuntarily lost before the individual can get to the toilet. • Functional incontinence. Individuals who have control over their own urination and have a fully functioning urinary tract, but cannot make it to the bathroom in time due to a physical or cognitive disability, are functionally incontinent. These individuals may suffer from arthritis, Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, or Alzheimer’s disease. • Reflex incontinence. Individuals with reflex incontinence lose control of their bladder without warning. They typically suffer from neurological impairment. 3453

Urinary incontinence

KEY TERMS

Wound Ostomy and Continence Nurses Society. 1550 South Coast Highway, Suite #201

Urinary incontinence

• Menopause. The absence of estrogen in the postmenopausal woman can cause the bladder to drop, or prolapse. • Neurological conditions. The nervous system sends signals to the bladder telling it when to start and stop emptying. When the nervous system is impaired, incontinence may result. Neurological conditions such as multiple sclerosis, stroke, spinal cord injuries, or a brain tumor may cause the bladder to contract involuntarily, expelling urine without warning, or to cease contractions completely, causing urinary retention. • Obesity. Individuals who are overweight have undue pressure placed on their bladder and surrounding muscles.

Strengthening the pelvic floor muscles by performing Kegel exercises helps to alleviate stress incontinence in women. Contract the pelvic floor muscles as if stopping an imaginery flow of urine. Hold for 10 seconds and repeat. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

In some cases, an individual may develop short-term or acute incontinence. Acute incontinence may occur as a symptom or by-product of illness, as a side effect of medication, or as a result of dietary intake. The condition is typically easily resolved once the cause is determined and addressed.

Causes and symptoms Urinary incontinence can be caused by a wide variety of physical conditions, including: • Childbirth. Childbirth can weaken the pelvic muscles and cause the bladder to lose some support from surrounding muscles, resulting in stress incontinence. • Dysfunction of the bladder and/or the urinary sphincter. In a continent individual, as the bladder contracts, the outlet that releases urine into the urethra (bladder sphincter) opens and urine exits the body. In individuals with overflow incontinence, bladder contractions and dilation of the sphincter do not occur at the same time. • Enlarged prostate. In men, an enlarged prostate gland can obstruct the bladder, causing overflow incontinence. • Hysterectomy or other gynecological surgery. Any surgery involving the urogenital tract runs the risk of damaging or weakening the pelvic muscles and causing incontinence. 3454

• Obstruction. A blockage at the bladder outlet may permit only small amounts of urine to pass, resulting in urine retention and subsequent overflow incontinence. Tumors, calculi, and scar tissue can all block the flow of urine. A urethral stricture, or narrow urethra caused by scarring or inflammation, may also result in urine retention. Acute incontinence is a temporary condition caused by a number of factors, including: • Bladder irritants. Substances in the urine that irritate the bladder may cause the bladder muscle to malfunction. The presence of a urinary tract infection and the ingestion of excess caffeine can act as irritants. Highly concentrated urine resulting from low fluid intake may also irritate the bladder. • Constipation. Constipation can cause incontinence in some individuals. Stool that isn’t passed presses against the bladder and urethra, triggering urine leakage. • Illness or disease. Diabetes can greatly increase urine volume, making some individuals prone to incontinence. Other illnesses may temporarily impair the ability to recognize and control the urge to urinate, or to reach the toilet in time to do so. • Medications and alcohol. Medications that sedate, such as tranquilizers and sleeping pills, can interfere with the proper functioning of the urethral nerves and bladder. Both sedatives and alcohol can also impair an individual’s ability to recognize the need to urinate, and act on that need in a timely manner. Other medications such as diuretics, muscle relaxants, and blood pressure medication can also affect bladder function. • Surgery. Men who undergo prostate surgery can suffer from temporary stress incontinence as a result of damage to the urethral outlet.

Diagnosis Urinary incontinence may be diagnosed by a general practitioner, urologist, or gynecologist. If the patient is GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Treatment There are numerous invasive and noninvasive treatment options for urinary incontinence: • Bladder training. Used to treat urge incontinence, bladder training involves placing a patient on a toileting schedule. The time interval between urination is then gradually increased until an acceptable time period between bathroom breaks is consistently achieved. • Biofeedback. The use of sensors to monitor temperature and muscle contractions in the vagina to help incontinent patients learn to control their pelvic muscles. • Collagen injections. Collagen injected in the tissue surrounding the urethra can provide urethral support for women suffering from stress incontinence. • Inflatable urethral insert. Sold under the tradename Reliance, this disposable incontinence balloon for women is inserted into the urethra and inflated to prevent urine leakage. • Intermittent urinary catheterization. The periodic insertion of a catheter into a patient’s bladder to drain urine from the bladder into an attached bag or container. • Medication. Estrogen hormone replacement therapy can help improve pelvic muscle tone in postmenopausal women. Anticholinergics (i.e., propantheline, or ProBanthine) and antispasmodics (i.e., oxybutynin, or Ditropan) are sometimes prescribed to relax the bladder muscles. Other over-the-counter medications such as pseudoephedrine (i.e., Actifed, Benadryl, Dimetapp) and phenylpropanolamine (i.e., Dexatrim, Acutrim) may be prescribed to tighten the urethral sphincter. • Pelvic toning exercises. Exercises to tone the pelvic muscle can help alleviate stress incontinence in both men and women. These exercises involve tightening the muscles of the pelvic floor, and are also known as Kegel or PC muscle exercises. • Perineal stimulation. Perineal stimulation is used to treat stress incontinence. The treatment uses a probe to GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

deliver a painless electrical current to the perineal area muscles. The current tones the muscle by contracting it. • Permanent catheterization. A permanent, or indwelling, catheter may be prescribed for chronic incontinence that doesn’t respond to other treatments. A Foley catheter is usually used for urinary catheterization. One end is inserted through the urethra and into the bladder, and the external end is attached to a plastic reservoir bag that the patient may wear on the leg. A second alternative is a permanent catheter, called a suprapubic tube, surgically inserted into the bladder. The tube exits the body through the abdomen near the pubic bone, where it is attached to a drainage bag. As infection may result, this treatment should be reevaluated periodically, and the possibility of alternative treatment addressed. • Surgery. Bladder neck suspension surgery is used to correct female urinary stress incontinence. Surgical techniques such as the Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz and Burch procedures use sutures to raise and support the bladder neck and urethra. A sling procedure, which uses a strip of biocompatible material or the patient’s own muscle or tissue as a supportive sling under the urethra and bladder neck, may also be used to treat stress incontinence. Bladder enlargement surgery may be recommended to treat incontinent men and women with unusually small bladders. • Urinary sphincter implant. An artificial urinary sphincter may be used to treat incontinence in men and women with urinary sphincter impairment. • Vaginal inserts. Devices constructed of silicone or other pliable materials that can be inserted into a woman’s vagina to support the urethra.

Prognosis Left untreated, incontinence can cause physical and emotional upheaval. Individuals with long-term incontinence suffer from urinary tract infections, and skin rashes and sores. Incontinence can also affect their self-esteem and cause depression and social withdrawal. They frequently stop participating in physical activities they once enjoyed because of the risk of embarrassing “accidents.” However, with the wide variety of treatment options for incontinence available today, the prognosis for incontinent patients is promising. If incontinence cannot be stopped, it can be improved in the majority of cases.

Prevention Women who are pregnant or who have gone through childbirth can reduce their risk for stress incontinence by strengthening their perineal area muscles with Kegel exercises. Men who have undergone prostate surgery 3455

Urinary incontinence

over age 65, a geriatrician may diagnose and treat the condition. A thorough medical history and physical examination is typically performed, along with specific diagnostic testing to determine the cause of the incontinence. Diagnostic testing may include x rays, ultrasound, urine tests, and a physical examination of the pelvis. It may also include a series of exams that measure bladder pressure and capacity and the urinary flow (urodynamic testing). The patient may also be asked to keep a diary to record urine output, frequency, and any episodes of incontinence over a period of several days or a week.

Urine culture

KEY TERMS Bladder neck—The place where the urethra and bladder join. Bladder sphincter—The outlet that releases urine into the urethra. Calculi—Mineral deposits that can form a blockage in the urinary system. Perineal area—The genital area between the vulva and anus in a woman, and between the scrotum and anus in a man.

Urine culture Definition A urine culture is a diagnostic laboratory test performed to detect the presence of bacteria in the urine (bacteriuria).

Purpose Culture of the urine is a method of diagnosis for urinary tract infection that determines the number of microorganisms present in a given quantity of urine.

Precautions may also benefit from pelvic muscle exercises. Men and women should consult with their doctor before initiating any type of exercise program. Resources

Description

BOOKS

Blaivas, Jerry. Conquering Bladder and Prostate Problems: The Authoritative Guide for Men and Women. New York: Plenum, 1998. King, Barbara, and Judy Harke. Coping with Bowel and Bladder Problems. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1994. PERIODICALS

Sandroff, Ronni. “Urgent Matters: Incontinence is Treatable, if Only Women Would Talk about It.” American Health for Women 16, no.8 (Oct 1997): 28-30. Strange, Carolyn J. “Incontinence Can Be Controlled.” FDA Consumer 31, no. 5 (July/Aug. 1997): 28-31. ORGANIZATIONS

American Foundation for Urologic Disease. 1128 North Charles St., Baltimore, MD 21201. (800) 242-2383. . National Association for Continence. P.O. Box 8310, Spartanburg, SC 29305-8310. (800) 252-3337. . National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Information Clearinghouse (NKUDIC). 3 Information Way, Bethesda, MD 20892-3580. (800) 891-5388. .

Paula Anne Ford-Martin

Urinary tract infections see Cystitis; Nongonococcal urethritis; Urethritis Urine concentration test see Kidney function tests 3456

If delivery of the urine specimen to the laboratory within one hour of collection is not possible, it should be refrigerated. The health care provider should be informed of any antibiotics currently or recently taken.

There are several different methods for collection of a urine sample. The most common is the midstream clean-catch technique. Hands should be washed before beginning. For females, the external genitalia (sex organs) are washed two or three times with a cleansing agent and rinsed with water. In males, the external head of the penis is similarly cleansed and rinsed. The patient is then instructed to begin to urinate, and the urine is collected midstream into a sterile container. In infants, a urinary collection bag (plastic bag with an adhesive seal on one end) is attached over the labia in girls or a boy’s penis to collect the specimen. Another method is the catheterized urine specimen in which a lubricated catheter (thin rubber tube) is inserted through the urethra (tube-like structure in which urine is expelled from the bladder) into the bladder. This avoids contamination from the urethra or external genitalia. If the patient already has a urinary catheter in place, a urine specimen may be collected by clamping the tubing below the collection port and using a sterile needle and syringe to obtain the urine sample; urine cannot be taken from the drainage bag, as it is not fresh and has had an opportunity to grow bacteria at room temperature. On rare occasions, the health care provider may collect a urine sample by inserting a needle directly into the bladder (suprapubic tap) and draining the urine; this method is used only when a sample is needed quickly. Negative culture results showing no bacterial growth are available after 24 hours. Positive results require 24–72 hours to complete identification of the number and type of bacteria found. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Bacteriuria—The presence of bacteria in the urine.

“Urine culture.” HealthAnswers.com 27 Feb. 1998. . Urine Culture.” ThriveOnline. 25 Feb. 1998 .

Kathleen D. Wright, RN

Preparation Drinking a glass of water 15–20 minutes before the test is helpful if there is no urge to urinate. There are no other special preparations or aftercare required for the test.

Risks There are no risks associated with the culture test itself. If insertion of a urinary catheter (thin rubber tube) is required to obtain the urine, there is a slight risk of introducing infection from the catheter.

Normal results No growth of bacteria is considered the normal result, and this indicates absence of infection.

Abnormal results Abnormal results, or a positive test, where bacteria are found in the specimen, may indicate a urinary tract infection. Contamination of the specimen from hair, external genitalia, or the rectum may cause a false-positive result. Identification of the number and type of bacteria, with consideration of the method used in obtaining the specimen, is significant in diagnosis. Escherichia coli causes approximately 80% of infections in patients without catheters, abnormalities of the urinary tract, or calculi (stones). Other bacteria that account for a smaller portion of uncomplicated infections include Proteus klebsiella and Enterobacter. Resources BOOKS

Urine flow test Definition A urine flow test evaluates the speed of urination, or amount voided per second, and the total time of urination.

Purpose A urine flow test is utilized to determine bladder function abnormalities, including a narrowed or obstructed urethra (the outflow passage from the bladder) and a weakened bladder muscle (detrusor).

Description During a urine flow test, the patient urinates into a uroflowmeter, a funnel-shaped device that reads, measures, and computes the rate and amount of urine flow. The test takes approximately 10 minutes.

Preparation The patient is prohibited from urinating at least two hours before the procedure.

Normal results Average urine flow rates vary depending on age and gender.

Abnormal results

David, Alan K., et al. Family Medicine: Principles and Practice. New York: Springer Verlag, Inc., 1994. Malarkey, Louise, and Mary Ellen McMorrow. Nurse’s Manual of Laboratory Tests and Diagnostic Procedures. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996.

A urine flow test can indicate problems in bladder function, such as an obstruction, that will need further tests to diagnose.

ORGANIZATIONS

BOOKS

American Foundation for Urologic Disease. 300 West Pratt St., Suite 401, Baltimore, MD 21201. National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Information Clearinghouse (NKUDIC). 3 Information Way, Bethesda, MD 20892-3580. (800) 891-5388. .

Pagana, Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1998. Walsh, Patrick C., et al., ed. Campbell’s Urology. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Resources

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD 3457

Urine flow test

OTHER

Uterine fibroids

The signs and symptoms of fibroids include:

KEY TERMS Detrusor muscle—Bladder muscle. Urethra—Passageway that carries urine from the bladder.

Urography see Intravenous urography Urticaria see Hives Uterine cancer see Endometrial cancer

Uterine fibroids Definition Uterine fibroids (also called leiomyomas or myomas) are benign growths of the muscle inside the uterus. They are not cancerous, nor are they related to cancer. Fibroids can cause a wide variety of symptoms, including heavy menstrual bleeding and pressure on the pelvis.

• Heavy uterine bleeding. This is the most common symptom, occurring in 30% of women who have fibroids. The excess bleeding usually happens during the menstrual period. Flow may be heavier, and periods may last longer. Women who have submucous or intramural fibroids are most likely to have heavy uterine bleeding. • Pelvic pressure and pain. Large fibroids that press on nearby structures such as the bladder and bowel can cause pressure and pain. Larger fibroids tend to cause worse symptoms. • Infertility. This is a rare symptom of fibroids. It probably accounts for less than 3% of infertility cases. Fibroids can cause infertility by compressing the uterine cavity. Submucous fibroids can fill the uterine cavity and interfere with implantation of the fertilized egg. • Miscarriage. This is also an unusual symptom of fibroids, probably accounting for only a tiny fraction of the miscarriages that occur. • Pregnancy complications. Fibroids can greatly increase in size during pregnancy, because of increased levels of estrogen. They can cause pain, and even lead to premature labor.

Diagnosis Description Uterine fibroids are extremely common. About 25% of women in their reproductive years have noticeable fibroids. There are probably many more women who have tiny fibroids that are undetected.

A health care provider can usually feel fibroids during a routine pelvic examination. Ultrasound can be used to confirm the diagnosis, but this is not necessary.

Treatment

Fibroids develop between the ages of 30–50. They are never seen in women less than 20 years old. After menopause, if a woman does not take estrogen, fibroids shrink. It appears that African-American women are much more likely to develop uterine fibroids.

Not all fibroids cause symptoms. Even fibroids that do cause symptoms may not require treatment. In the majority of cases, the symptoms are inconvenient and unpleasant, but do not result in health problems.

Fibroids are divided into different types, depending on the location. Submucous fibroids are found in the uterine cavity; intramural fibroids grow on the wall of the uterus; and subserous fibroids are located on the outside of the uterus. Many fibroids are so large that they fit into more than one category. The symptoms caused by fibroids are often related to their location.

Occasionally, fibroids lead to such heavy menstrual bleeding that the woman becomes severely anemic. In these cases, treatment of the fibroids may be necessary. Very large fibroids are much harder to treat. Therefore, many doctors recommend treatment for moderatelysized fibroids, in the hopes of preventing them from growing into large fibroids that cause worse symptoms. The following are possible treatment plans:

Causes and symptoms No one knows exactly what causes fibroids. However, the growth of fibroids appears to depend on the hormone estrogen. Fibroids often grow larger when estrogen levels are high, as in pregnancy. Medications that lower the estrogen level can cause the fibroids to shrink. 3458

• Observation. This is the most common plan. Most women already have symptoms at the time their fibroids are discovered, but feel that they can tolerate their symptoms. Therefore, no active treatment is given, but the woman and her physician stay alert for signs that the condition might be getting worse. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Uterine fibroids

Fallopian tubes

Ovary Uterus Fibroids (benign tumors)

Cervix Vagina

Uterine fibroids are benign growths of uterine muscle and are very common. They are divided into three types, depending on the location. Submucous fibroids are found in the uterine cavity; intramural fibroids grow on the wall of the uterus; and subserous fibroids are located outside of the uterus. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

• Hysterectomy. This involves surgical removal of the uterus, and it is the only real cure for fibroids. In fact, 25% of hysterectomies are performed because of symptomatic fibroids. By the time a woman has a hysterectomy for fibroids, she has usually endured several years of worsening symptoms. That’s because fibroids tend to grow over time. A gynecologist can remove a fibroid uterus during either an abdominal or a vaginal hysterectomy. The choice depends on the size of the fibroids and other factors such as previous births and previous surgeries. • Myomectomy. In this surgical procedure only the fibroids are removed; the uterus is repaired and left in place. This is the surgical procedure many women choose if they are not finished with childbearing. At first glance, it seems that this treatment is a middle ground between observation and hysterectomy. However, myomectomy is actually a difficult surgical procedure, more difficult than a hysterectomy. Myomectomy often causes significant blood loss, and blood transfusions may be required. In addition, some fibroids are so large, or buried so deeply within the wall of the uterus, that it is not possible to save GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

the uterus, and a hysterectomy must be done, even though it was not planned. There are exceptions to this, however. Sometimes, fibroids grow on a stalk (pedunculated fibroids), and these are easy to remove. • Medical treatment. Since fibroids are dependent on estrogen for their growth, medical treatments that lower estrogen levels can cause fibroids to shrink. A group of medications known as GnRH antagonists can dramatically lower estrogen levels. Women who take these medications for three to six months find that their fibroids shrink in size by 50% or more. They usually experience dramatic relief of their symptoms of heavy bleeding and pelvic pain. Unfortunately, GnRH antagonists cause unpleasant side effects in over 90% of women. The therapy is usually used for only three months, and should not be used for more than six months because the risk of developing brittle bones (osteoporosis) begins to rise. Once the treatment is stopped, the fibroids begin to grow back to their original size. Within six months, most of the old symptoms return. Therefore, GnRH antagonists cannot be used as long-term solution. At the moment, treatment 3459

Uveitis

KEY TERMS

Muto, Michael G., and Andrew J. Friedman. “Leiomyomas.” In Kistner’s Gynecology. 6th ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan, Ross S. Berkowitz, and Robert L. Barbieri. St. Louis: Mosby, 1995.

Anemia—Low blood count. GnRH antagonists—A group of medications that affect the reproductive hormones. These medications are used to treat fibroids, endometriosis, and infertility. Hysterectomy—Removal of the uterus (with or without removal of the ovaries) by surgery. The surgery can be performed through an incision in the abdomen, or the uterus can be removed through the vagina. Menopause—The end of the reproductive years, signaled by the end of menstrual periods. Also known as “the change.” Osteoporosis—Brittle bones commonly found in elderly women.

with GnRH antagonists is used mainly in preparation for surgery (myomectomy or hysterectomy). Shrinking the size of the fibroids makes surgery much easier, and reducing the heavy bleeding allows a woman to build up her blood count before surgery. Fibroids can cause problems during pregnancy because they often grow in size. Large fibroids can cause pain and lead to premature labor. Fibroids cannot be removed during pregnancy because of the risk of injury to the uterus and hemorrhage. GnRH antagonists cannot be used during pregnancy. Treatment is limited to pain medication and medication to prevent premature labor, if necessary.

Prognosis Many women who have fibroids have no symptoms or have only minor symptoms of heavy menstrual bleeding or pelvic pressure. However, fibroids tend to grow over time, and gradually cause more symptoms. Many women ultimately decide to have some form of treatment. Currently, hysterectomy is the most popular form of treatment.

Prevention Uterine fibroids cannot be prevented. Resources BOOKS

Friedman, Andrew J. “Uterine Fibroids.” In Primary Care of Women, ed. Karen J. Carlson and Stephanie A. Eisenstat. St. Louis: Mosby-Year Book, Inc., 1995. 3460

Amy B. Tuteur, MD

Uterus x rays see Hysterosalpingography

Uveitis Definition Uveitis is an inflammation of the uveal tract, which lines the inside of the eye behind the cornea. Much of the uvea lies between the retina and tough, outer sclera. The uveal tract has three parts: the iris, the ciliary body, and the choroid. Uveitis is categorized according to the part of the uveal tract that is affected. Anterior uveitis is an inflammation of the front part of the uveal tract; it includes inflammation of the iris (iritis) and inflammation of the iris and the ciliary body (iridocyclitis). Posterior uveitis is an inflammation of the part of the uveal tract behind the lens of the eye. It includes inflammation of the choroid (choroiditis) and inflammation of the choroid and retina (chorioretinitis). Uveitis that affects the entire uveal tract is called panuveitis or diffuse uveitis.

Description The uveal tract is made up of the iris, ciliary body, and choroid. The iris is the colored part of the eye. The ciliary body is inside the eye and produces a fluid called aqueous humor. Ciliary muscles aid in accommodation, the process of changing the shape of the lens in the eye to see things at various distances. The choroid lines the back of the eye and has many blood vessels. It helps nourish part of the retina. The choroid lies between the retina and outermost sclera. Uveitis may either persist for a long time (chronic) or have a short-term duration (acute). Anterior uveitis is classified as either granulomatous or nongranulomatous. The distinction is based on the disease agents that were considered responsible for the condition. At one time, it was thought that granulomatous uveitis was caused by tuberculosis bacilli whereas nongranulomatous uveitis was thought to be caused by streptococci. The distinction is still used even though the causes of uveitis are now understood differently. In most cases, uveitis affects only one eye, although posterior uveitis sometimes involves both eyes. About 60% of cases develop within the eye itself, but 40% are GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Uveitis

associated with systemic diseases or disorders ranging from toxoplasmosis to syphilis. Many of these are diseases of childhood and adolescence. Uveitis does not appear to run in families or to be associated with lifestyle choices, occupational history, geographical location, or environmental factors. Uveitis is a serious condition that may develop rapidly and cause lasting damage to the eye. Patients who think they may have chronic uveitis should seek evaluation and treatment by an ophthalmologist (a physician who specializes in diseases of the eye) as soon as possible. If the patient has a sudden loss of vision and the eye looks inflamed, the patient should go immediately to the doctor for emergency treatment.

Causes and symptoms The causes of uveitis are not fully understood, but they can be a result of trauma, allergy, or a response to a systemic or ocular disease. Uveitis may be a type of immune-response mechanism. In people with impaired immune systems, uveitis may be due to an infection. Chronic uveitis is often associated with systemic disorders (e.g., Lyme disease, sarcoidosis, or juvenile rheumatoid arthritis). Anterior uveitis The so-called classic symptoms of anterior uveitis— severe pain; redness, particularly around the edge of the iris; and extreme sensitivity to light (photophobia)— occur mostly in acute uveitis. In anterior uveitis, the doctor will see a so-called “flare and cell” pattern when looking into the watery fluid (aqueous humor) between the cornea and the lens of the patient’s eye. The iris may adhere to the lens, thus increasing the intraocular pressure. There may be nodules on the iris. There may be tearing and the pupil may be constricted and nonreactive. In severe cases of anterior uveitis, there may be hypopyon (a small amount of pus or collection of white cells) visible when the doctor examines the eye. GRANULOMATOUS UVEITIS. In granulomatous uveitis,

there will be large yellowish-white cells visible on the back of the cornea, and possibly some small nodules on the iris. Granulomatous uveitis is usually less acute than the nongranulomatous form; the eye is only mildly inflamed and the patient’s vision is somewhat blurred. Granulomatous uveitis can be produced by syphilis, toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, or Vogt-Koyonagi-Harada syndrome (VKH). VKH is marked by severe uveitis associated with hair loss, hearing loss, loss of pigment in the eyelashes and brows, and headaches. It occurs most commonly in Asians. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

This person has acute iritis, or inflammation of the iris. Symptoms include pain in the eye or forehead and reddening of the margin of the iris. Treatment requires total rest of the eye (dark glasses and atropine drops which paralyze the muscles of accommodation), accompanied by application of corticosteroids. (Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

NONGRANULOMATOUS UVEITIS. In nongranulomatous uveitis, the cells visible on the cornea are smaller, and there are no masses on the iris. This type of anterior uveitis is, however, more painful. The eye is red and the patient experiences both photophobia and loss of vision.

Systemic diseases that can cause nongranulomatous uveitis include ankylosing spondylitis, Reiter’s syndrome, psoriasis, ulcerative colitis, Behcet’s syndrome, Lyme disease, and Crohn’s disease. Children— especially girls—with anterior uveitis should be screened for juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA). Posterior uveitis The symptoms of posterior uveitis are sometimes subtle. The patient may notice blurred or hazy vision, or floating black spots before the eyes. There may be pain and photophobia. The iris may attach to the lens in the eye thus increasing intraocular pressure. Posterior uveitis may be acute or chronic. It is more likely to involve both eyes. When the doctor examines the eye, cells may be seen in the vitreous humor, which is the normally transparent gel that fills the eyeball behind the lens. There will be yellowish or dark areas of inflammation on the choroid and the retina. The blood vessels in the retina develop a sheath or covering of inflammatory tissue. In severe cases, the vitreous humor is so cloudy that the doctor cannot see the retina at the back of the eye. PARS PLANITIS. Pars planitis is an inflammation of the pars plana, which is a part of the ciliary body. Pars planitis usually occurs in older children or young adults, and can develop into posterior uveitis.

3461

Uveitis

KEY TERMS Choroid—The part of the uveal tract behind the ciliary body. The choroid underlies and nourishes the retina and absorbs scattered light. Ciliary body—The part of the uveal tract between the iris and the choroid. Cornea—The transparent front part of the eye that covers the iris and pupil. Flare and cell—A pattern revealed by slit-lamp examination that indicates uveitis. Flare and cell resembles light filtered through smoke. Hypopyon—A small amount of pus or collection of white cells that is visible in the front of the eye in severe cases of anterior uveitis. Iris—The circular membrane that forms the colored portion of the eye and expands or contracts around the pupil. Photophobia—Extreme sensitivity to light. Photophobia is a major symptom of acute uveitis. Pupil—The opening in the center of the iris that allows light to pass through to the retina. Retina—The innermost membrane at the back of the eyeball on which images are projected by the lens. Slit lamp—An instrument that combines a binocular microscope with special lights. It allows an eye doctor to examine the front portion of the eye. Uveal tract—The pigmented membrane that lines the back of the retina of the eye and extends forward to include the iris. The uveal tract is sometimes called the uvea and has three parts: the iris, the choroid, and the ciliary body. Vitreous humor—The clear gel-like substance that fills the eyeball behind the lens.

The diseases that cause granulomatous uveitis may also cause posterior uveitis.

Diagnosis The eye doctor will examine the patient’s eyes with a slit lamp in order to rule out conjunctivitis and certain types of glaucoma. The slit lamp is an instrument that combines a binocular microscope with a special light. The slit lamp can shine a narrow beam of very bright light into the eye and allow the doctor to examine the front part of the eye in detail. The slit-lamp exam is not 3462

painful, however if the patient is sensitive to light there will be discomfort. The absence of a discharge from the eye and the absence of infectious organisms in a laboratory smear usually rule out conjunctivitis. In addition, the size of the pupil is often small in uveitis whereas it is normal in conjunctivitis. In acute glaucoma, the patient has severe pain, the cornea of the eye is cloudy, and the pressure level of the fluid inside the eye is abnormally high; whereas in uveitis the pain is moderate, the cornea is clear, and the fluid pressure is normal or possibly lower or slightly above normal. The doctor may also use the slit lamp and another lens to examine the back of the eye to get a good look at the retina and choroid. Other instruments, such as a hand-held ophthalmoscope or a binocular indirect ophthalmoscope, can be used to examine the back of the eye. There should be no discomfort with these tests except if the patient is sensitive to the bright light. Laboratory testing Laboratory testing is used to rule out conjunctivitis in some patients. The doctor wipes the inside of the patient’s eyelid with a swab in order to obtain a sample for testing. Although blood tests are not necessary to diagnose uveitis by itself, they are used to diagnose the cause if the doctor suspects that toxoplasmosis or another systemic disease is responsible for the uveitis.

Treatment Uveitis is generally treated by an ophthalmologist because therapy requires topical and oral medications, however, some optometrists (O.D.) are state licensed to use therapeutic medications. Other doctors may be involved in treating the underlying disease, if the patient has one, and in monitoring the patient’s responses to medications. Anterior uveitis is treated with corticosteroid drops; in severe cases, the patient may be given steroid injections in the area of the eye or oral steroids. Atropine sulfate drops may be given to dilate the patient’s pupil. Posterior uveitis is treated with systemic corticosteroids. It is usually not necessary to dilate the pupil. Prolonged steroid use may increase intraocular pressure, thereby increasing the risk of glaucoma. Steroid use has also been connected to cataract formation. Patients should be monitored closely and frequently.

Prognosis The prognosis depends upon the location of the uveitis, on whether it is chronic or acute, and on the promptness of treatment. The prognosis for untreated uveitis is poor. Untreated anterior uveitis usually proGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Prevention Patients with anterior uveitis should be warned about the possibility of recurrence and instructed about its symptoms, especially inflammation of the iris. They should be advised to seek treatment at once at the first signs of recurrence. Resources BOOKS

Eisenbaum, Allan M. “Eye.” In Current Pediatric Diagnosis & Treatment, ed. William W. Hay Jr., et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

“Ophthalmologic Disorders: Uveal Tract; Uveitis.” In The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 16th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1992. Riordan-Eva, Paul, et al. “Eye.” In Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1998. 37th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1997. Illustrated Guide to Diagnostic Tests. Ed. J. A. Lewis. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corp. 1994. “Uveitis.” In Professional Guide to Diseases, ed. Stanley Loeb, et al. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1991. ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street, P.O. Box 7424, San Francisco, CA 94120-7424. . American Optometric Association. 243 North Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63141. (314) 991-4100. .

3463

Uveitis

gresses to posterior uveitis, resulting in cataracts, scar tissue, and eventual glaucoma. If treated promptly, anterior uveitis usually clears up in several days or weeks, but is likely to recur. Posterior uveitis usually results in some permanent loss or blurring of vision.

V Vaccination Definition Vaccination is the use of vaccines to prevent specific diseases.

Purpose Many diseases that once caused widespread illness, disability, and death now can be prevented through the use of vaccines. Vaccines are medicines that contain weakened or dead bacteria or viruses. When a person takes a vaccine, his or her immune system responds by producing antibodies—substances that weaken or destroy disease-causing organisms. When the person is later exposed to live bacteria or viruses of the same kind that were in the vaccine, the antibodies prevent those organisms from making the person sick. Vaccines usually also stimulate the so-called cellular immune system as well. In other words, the person becomes immune to the disease the organisms normally cause. The process of building up immunity by taking a vaccine is called immunization. Vaccines are used in several ways. Some, such as the rabies vaccine, are given only when a person is likely to have been exposed to the virus that causes the disease— through a dog bite, for example. Others are given to travelers planning to visit countries where certain diseases are common such as typhoid fever or yellow fever. Vaccines such as the influenza vaccine, or “flu shot,” are given mainly to specific groups of people—older adults and others who are at high risk of developing influenza or its complications. Then, there are vaccines that are given to almost everyone, such as the ones that prevent diphtheria, tetanus, polio and measles. Children routinely have a series of vaccinations that begins at birth. Given according to a specific schedule, these vaccinations protect against hepatitis B, diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough), measles, mumps, rubella (German measles), varicella (chickenGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

pox), polio, pneumococcus and Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib disease, a major cause of spinal meningitis) and, in some states, hepatitis A. This series of vaccinations is recommended by the American Academy of Family Physicians, the American Academy of Pediatrics, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and is required in all states before children can enter school. All states will make exceptions for children who have medical conditions such as cancer that prevent them from having vaccinations, and some states also will make exceptions for children whose parents object for religious or other reasons.

Description In addition to those discussed above, vaccines are available for preventing anthrax, cholera, hepatitis A, Japanese encephalitis, meningococcal meningitis, plague, pneumococcal infection (meningitis, pneumonia), tuberculosis, typhoid fever, and yellow fever. Most vaccines are given as injections, but a few are given by mouth. Some vaccines are combined in one injection, such as the measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) or diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus (DPT) combinations.

Recommended dosage The recommended dosage depends on the type of vaccine and may be different for different patients. The healthcare professional who gives the vaccine will decide on the proper dose. A vaccination health record will help parents and health care providers keep track of a child’s vaccinations. The record should be started when the child has his or her first vaccination and should be updated with each additional vaccination. While most physicians follow the recommended vaccination schedule, parents should understand that some flexibility is allowed. For example, vaccinations that are scheduled for age two months may be given anytime between six to 10 weeks. When possi3465

Vaccination

Recommended Immunization Schedule Age

Vaccine

0–2 months 1–4 months 2 months

Hepatitis B Hepatitis B DTP (diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis) Hib (Haemophilus influenzae type B) Polio DTP Hib Polio DTP Hib Hepatitis B Polio Hib MMR (measles-mumps-rubella) Varicella (chickenpox) DTP DTP Polio MMR Hepatitis B (if not already completed) MMR (if not already completed) Varicella (if not already completed) DT (diptheria-tetanus booster shot; and then booster shot every 10 to 15 years)

4 months

6 months 6–18 months 12–15 months 12–18 months 15–18 months 4–6 years

11–12 years

11–16 years

An allergic reaction to a vaccination shot. (Photograph by Lester V. Bergman, Corbis Images. Reproduced by permission.)

ble, follow the schedule. However, slight departures will not prevent the child from developing immunity, as long as all the vaccinations are given at around the right times. The child’s physician is the best person to decide when each vaccination should be given. Anyone planning a trip to another country should check to find out what vaccinations are needed. Some vaccinations must be given as much as 12 weeks before the trip, so getting this information early is important. Many major hospitals and medical centers have travel clinics that can provide this information. The Traveler’s Health Section of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also has information on vaccination requirements.

concerns should be discussed with a physician or other health care provider. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, located in Atlanta, Georgia, also is a good source of information.

Vaccines are not always effective, and there is no way to predict whether a vaccine will “take” in any particular person. To be most effective, vaccination programs depend on whole communities participating. The more people who are vaccinated, the lower everyone’s risk of being exposed to a disease. Even people who do not develop immunity through vaccination are safer when their friends, neighbors, children, and coworkers are immunized.

Vaccines may cause problems for people with certain allergies. For example, people who are allergic to the antibiotics neomycin or polymyxin B should not take rubella vaccine, measles vaccine, mumps vaccine or the combined measles-mumps-rubella (MMR) vaccine. Anyone who has had a severe allergic reaction to baker’s yeast should not take the hepatitis B vaccine. Patients who are allergic to antibiotics such as gentamicin sulfate, streptomycin sulfate or other aminoglycosides should check with their physicians before taking influenza vaccine, as some influenza vaccines contain small amounts of these drugs. Also, some vaccines, including those for influenza, measles and mumps, are grown in the fluids of chick embryos and should not be taken by people who are allergic to eggs. In general, anyone who has had an unusual reactions to a vaccine in the past should let his or her physician know before taking the same kind of vaccine again. The physician also should be told about any allergies to foods, medicines, preservatives, or other substances.

Like most medical procedures, vaccination has risks as well as substantial benefits. Anyone who takes a vaccine should make that sure he or she is fully informed about both the benefits and the risks. Any questions or

People with certain other medical conditions should be cautious about taking vaccines. Influenza vaccine, for example, may reactivate Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) in people who have had it before. This vaccine

Precautions

3466

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vaccination

A. Antigens

B Macrophage T

B

D.

B.

Antibody T

T

C. How vaccines work: A. Vaccines contain antigens (weakened or dead viruses, bacteria, and fungi that cause disease and infection). When introduced into the body, the antigens stimulate the immune system response by instructing B cells to produce antibodies, with assistance from T-cells. B. The antibodies are produced to fight the weakened or dead viruses in the vaccine. C. The antibodies “practice” on the weakened viruses, preparing the immune system to destroy real and stronger viruses in the future. D. When new antigens enter the body, white blood cells called macrophages engulf them, process the information contained in the antigens, and send it to the T-cells so that an immune system response can be mobilized. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

also may worsen illnesses that involve the lungs, such as bronchitis or pneumonia. Vaccines that cause fever as a side effect may trigger seizures in people who have a history of seizures caused by fever.

polio. Vaccines also may be given to pregnant women to prevent medical problems in their babies. For example, vaccinating a pregnant woman with tetanus toxoid can prevent her baby from getting tetanus at birth.

Certain vaccines are not recommended for use during pregnancy, but some may be given to women at especially high risk of getting a specific disease such as

Women should avoid becoming pregnant for three months after taking rubella vaccine, measles vaccine, mumps vaccine or the combined measles-mumps-rubella

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

3467

Vaccination

KEY TERMS Anthrax—An infectious disease caused by a type of bacterium. The disease can be passed from animals to people and usually is fatal. Symptoms include sores on the skin.

tects the body against an infectious disease. A vaccination is a type of immunization.

Antibody—A type of protein produced in the blood or in the body tissues that helps the body fight infection.

Meningitis—Inflammation of tissues that surround the brain and spinal cord.

Bacteria—Tiny, one-celled forms of life that cause many diseases and infections. Cholera—An infection of the small intestine caused by a type of bacterium. The disease is spread by drinking water or eating seafood or other foods that have been contaminated with the feces of infected people. It occurs in parts of Asia, Africa, Latin America, India, and the Middle East. Symptoms include watery diarrhea and exhaustion.

Inflammation—Pain, redness, swelling, and heat that usually develop in response to injury or illness.

Microorganism—An organism that is too small to be seen with the naked eye. Organism—An individual of some type of life form, such as a plant, an animal, or a microorganism. Plague—A highly infectious disease that can be fatal if not treated promptly. The bacteria that cause plague mainly infect rats, mice, squirrels, and other wild rodents. The disease is passed to people through fleas. Infected people can then spread the disease to other people.

Encephalitis—Inflammation of the brain, usually caused by a virus. The inflammation may interfere with normal brain function and may cause seizures, sleepiness, confusion, personality changes, weakness in one or more parts of the body, and even coma.

Seizure—A sudden attack, spasm, or convulsion.

Feces—(Also called stool.) The solid waste that is left after food is digested. Feces form in the intestines and pass out of the body through the anus.

Typhoid fever—An infectious disease caused by a type of bacterium. People with this disease have a lingering fever and feel depressed and exhausted. Diarrhea and rose-colored spots on the chest and abdomen are other symptoms. The disease is spread through poor sanitation.

Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS)—A disease of the nerves with symptoms that include sudden numbness and weakness in the arms and legs, sometimes leading to paralysis. The disease is serious and requires medical treatment, but most people recover completely. Immune system—The body’s natural defenses against disease and infection. Immunization—A process or procedure that pro-

(MMR) as these vaccines could cause problems in the unborn baby. Women who are breastfeeding should check with their physicians before taking any vaccine.

Side effects Most side effects from vaccines are minor and easily treated. The most common are pain, redness, and swelling at the site of the injection. Some people may also develop 3468

Tuberculosis—An infectious disease that usually affects the lungs, but may also affect other parts of the body. Symptoms include fever, weight loss, and coughing up blood.

Virus—A tiny, disease-causing particle that can reproduce only in living cells. Yellow fever—An infectious disease caused by a virus. The disease, which is spread by mosquitoes, is most common in Central and South America and Central Africa. Symptoms include high fever, jaundice (yellow eyes and skin) and dark-colored vomit, a sign of internal bleeding. Yellow fever can be fatal.

a fever or a rash. In rare cases, vaccines may cause severe allergic reactions, swelling of the brain, or seizures. Anyone who has an unusual reaction after receiving a vaccine should get in touch with a physician right away.

Interactions Vaccines may interact with other medicines and medical treatments. When this happens, the effects of the vaccine or the other medicine may change or the risk of side GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Laproscopic surgery— A surgical procedure to correct or diagnose an underlying disease.

Causes and symptoms

Resources PERIODICALS

Doheny, Kathleen. “Vaccinations Are for Big People Too: Adults Should Consider Asking Their Doctors about Hepatitis B and Other Ailments.” Vibrant Life 11 (September-October 1995): 15. Gindler, Jacqueline, et al. “Immunization—Effective at All Ages.” Patient Care 29 (May 15, 1995): 119. McCall, Timothy. “Should You Get a Flu Shot?” American Health 15 (September 1996): 23. OTHER

Centers for Disease Control National Immunization Program. . National Immunization Information Hotline. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (800) 232-2522.

Larry I. Lutwick, MD

Vaccines see Vaccination

Vaginal pain Definition Pain in the vaginal canal is usually associated with an underlying medical and/or psychological condition.

Description Vaginal pain is experienced usually during vaginal manipulation or sexual intercourse. Approximately 50–85% of the causes are due to organic (medical) conditions. However, it is typical for the medical condition to be compounded by psychological issues such as depression and problems associated with sexual identity. The primary entity concerns dyspareunia, a vaginal pain experienced during sexual intercourse. The vagina has three physiological functions: an outflow duct for menstrual discharge, to receive the penis during sexual intercourse, and as the birthing canal. The overall prevalence for dyspareunia is 20% (15% of women and 57% of men). A significant percentage of breast cancer and hysterectomy patients demonstrated sexual dysfunction. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The causes can be categorized as organic, due to a medical condition and/or psychological difficulties. Medical conditions can include chronic diseases, minor ailments, breast cancer, and medications. Psychological cause can be related to physical or sexual abuse. Pregnancy and hormonal changes (decreased estrogen) have significant negative impact on sexual activity, desire, and satisfaction. Dyspareunia can be divided into three types of pain: superficial, vaginal, and deep. Superficial pain is associated with attempted penetration. This is usually caused by changes in anatomy, irritative condition, or vaginismus. Vaginal pain is associated with friction, indicating a problem with lubrication and /or arousal disorders. Deep pain is related to thrusting and is indicative of pelvic disease or an inability for pelvic relaxation.

Diagnosis The diagnosis must be pursued with diligence and in a comprehensive manner. A careful history and physical examination is essential. Procedures that can be used include surgical investigation (laparoscopy) and treatment of the underlying cause(s).

Treatment Treatment is directed at diagnosing the underlying condition, which can be medical and/or psychological cause(s). Treatment can include surgery, hormonal therapy (replacements), psychotherapy, and pain control protocols.

Prognosis The prognosis depends on the primary cause. If treatment is aggressively pursued and patient compliance is satisfactory the overall outcome is favorable.

Prevention There are no precise preventive measures since the condition can result from normal aging and/or progressively worsening psychological disease. Resources BOOKS

Ryan, Kenneth J., et al, eds. Kistner’s Gynecology & Women’s Health. 7th ed. Mosby, Inc., 1999. 3469

Vaginal pain

effects may be greater. For example, radiation therapy and cancer drugs may reduce the effectiveness of many vaccines or may increase the chance of side effects. Anyone who takes a vaccine should let the physician know all other medicines he or she is taking and should ask whether the possible interactions could interfere with the effects of the vaccine or the other medicines.

Vagotomy

Goroll, Allan H., et al. Primary Care Medicine. 4th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2000. Tasman, Allan, et al eds. Psychiatry. 1st ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 1997.

ulcers make it necessary to act immediately. As with any major surgery, people who use alcohol excessively, smoke, are obese, and are very young or very old are at higher risks for complications.

ORGANIZATION

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 409 12th St., S.W., PO Box 96920, Washington, D.C., 200906920.

Laith Farid Gulli, M.D. Kathleen Berrisford, MSW, CSW

Vaginal warts see Genital warts Vaginitis see Vulvovaginitis

Vagotomy Definition Vagotomy is the surgical cutting of the vagus nerve to reduce acid secretion in the stomach.

Purpose The vagus nerve splits into branches that go to different parts of the stomach. Stimulation from these branches causes the stomach to produce acid. Too much stomach acid leads to ulcers that may eventually bleed and create an emergency situation. Vagotomy is performed when acid production in the stomach can not be reduced by other means. It is used when ulcers in the stomach and duodenum do not respond to medication and changes in diet. It is an appropriate surgery when there are ulcer complications, such as obstruction of digestive flow, bleeding, or perforation. The frequency with which elective vagotomy is performed has decreased in the past 20 years as drugs have become increasingly effective in treating ulcers. However, the number of vagotomies performed in emergency situations has remained about the same. Vagotomy is often performed in conjunction with other gastrointestinal surgery, such as partial removal of the stomach (antrectomy or subtotal gastrectomy). There are several types of vagotomies. Truncal vagotomy severs the trunk of the vagus nerve as it enters the abdomen. Parietal cell or proximal gastric vagotomy leaves the trunk intact, but severs the branches that go to different parts of the stomach.

Precautions Patients who receive vagotomies are most often seen in emergency situations where bleeding and perforated 3470

Description Vagotomy is performed under general anesthesia by a surgeon in a hospital. The surgeon makes an incision in the abdomen and locates the vagus nerve. Either the trunk or the branches leading to the stomach are cut. Then the abdominal muscles are sewn back together, and the skin is closed with sutures. Often, other gastrointestinal surgery is performed at the same time as the vagotomy. Part of the stomach may be removed, for instance. Vagotomy causes a decrease in peristalsis and a change in the emptying patterns of the stomach. To ease this, a pyloroplasty is often performed. This procedure widens the outlet from the stomach to the small intestine.

Preparation A gastroscopy and x rays of the gastrointestinal system are performed as diagnostic procedures to determine the position and condition of the ulcer. Standard preoperative blood and urine tests are done. The patient should discuss with the anesthesiologist any medications or conditions that might affect the administration of anesthesia.

Aftercare Patients who have had a vagotomy stay in the hospital for about seven days. For the first three or four days, nasogastric suctioning is required. A tube is inserted through the nose and into the stomach. The stomach contents are then suctioned out. Patients eat a clear liquid diet until the gastrointestinal tract is functioning again. When patients return to a regular diet, spicy and acidic food should be avoided. It takes about six weeks to fully recover from the surgery. The sutures that close the skin can be removed in seven to ten days. Patients are encouraged to move around soon after the operation to prevent the formation of deep vein blood clots. Pain medication, stool softeners, and antibiotics may be prescribed following the operation.

Risks As with all surgery, excessive bleeding and infection are possible complications. In addition, the emptying patterns of the stomach are changed. This can lead to dumping syndrome and diarrhea. Dumping syndrome is a condition where shortly after eating, the patient experiGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Normal results Normal recovery is expected for most patients. In about 10% of those who have vagotomy without stomach removal, ulcers recur. Two to three percent of patients who have some portion of their stomach removed also have recurrent ulcers.

KEY TERMS Atria—The heart has four chambers. The right and left atria are at the top of the heart and receive returning blood from the veins. The right and left ventricles are at the bottom of the heart and act as the body’s main pumps. Echocardiography—An ultrasound test that shows the size, shape, and movement of the heart.

Resources BOOKS

“Stomach and Duodenum.” In Current Surgical Diagnosis and Treatment. 10th ed. Ed. Lawrence W. Way. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1994.

Tish Davidson

Valacyclovir see Antiviral drugs Valley fever see Coccidioidomycosis

to respond by correcting its rhythm and beating more slowly. On rare occasions, the Valsalva maneuver can be used to diminish chest pain in patients with mild coronary disease. Unrelated to any evaluation of the heart, the Valsalva maneuver is also taught to patients with multiple sclerosis who are unable to fully empty the bladder (flaccid bladder). It is sometimes used in sexual therapy to help men avoid premature ejaculation.

Precautions

Valsalva maneuver Definition The Valsalva maneuver is performed by attempting to forcibly exhale while keeping the mouth and nose closed. It is used as a diagnostic tool to evaluate the condition of the heart and is sometimes done as a treatment to correct abnormal heart rhythms or relieve chest pain.

Purpose The Valsalva maneuver is used with patients who have suspected heart abnormalities, often in conjunction with echocardiography. The maneuver is based on the fact that when a patient forcibly exhales against a closed nose and mouth while bearing down, as if having a bowel movement, specific changes occur in blood pressure and the rate and volume of blood returning to the heart. Comparing the changes in a diseased heart to those expected in a normal heart gives clues to the type and location of heart damage. In addition, when a doctor listens to the chest with a stethoscope during the Valsalva maneuver, characteristic heart sounds are heard. Variations in these sounds can indicate the type of abnormality present in the heart. The Valsalva maneuver also corrects some rapid heartbeats originating in the atria. When the maneuver is done correctly, blood pressure rises. This forces the heart GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The Valsalva maneuver should not be performed on patients who have severe coronary artery disease, have experienced recent heart attack, or where there is a moderate to severe reduction in blood volume.

Description When performed formally, the patient is asked to blow against an aneroid pressure measuring device (manometer) and maintain a pressure of 40 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) for 30 seconds. Or, less formally, the patient may be asked to bear down, as if having a bowel movement. During this 30 second period, a recording is made of the changes in blood pressure and murmurs of the heart.

Preparation The patient may be connected to a heart monitor and echocardiograph or the physician may simply use a stethoscope to monitor the heart. Sometimes an indwelling needle is inserted for accurate pressure measurements, depending on whether the procedure is being done for corrective or diagnostic purposes.

Aftercare When this procedure is done to regulate irregular heart rhythms, the patient usually remains on a heart monitor to evaluate heartbeat. 3471

Valsalva maneuver

ences palpitations, sweating, nausea, cramps, vomiting, and diarrhea.

Valvular heart disease

Risks The patient may feel dizzy or faint during the procedure, but serious consequences are rare. There is a risk that the Valsalva maneuver can cause blood clots to detach, bleeding, and abnormal rhythms originating in the ventricle. It can also cause cardiac arrest. Consequently, the procedure is usually performed in a setting where emergency equipment is accessible.

Normal results There are four characteristic changes or phases in a normal heart’s response to the Valsalva maneuver. An abnormality in any of these phases indicates a cardiovascular abnormality.

• The tricuspid valve is located on the right side of the heart, between the right atrium and right ventricle. It is made up of three cusps, each a different size. • The aortic valve is located on the left side of the heart and opens to allow blood to leave the heart from the left ventricle into the aorta, which is the main artery of the body. It closes to prevent blood from flowing back into the left ventricle. • The pulmonary valve is situated on the right side of the heart, between the right ventricle and pulmonary artery. It allows blood to exit the heart and enter the lungs via the pulmonary artery. It closes to prevent blood from flowing back into the right ventricle.

Resources

Patients with valvular heart disease have a malfunction of one or more of these valves. There are several types of valvular heart diseases with distinct symptoms and treatments. These are:

BOOKS

• mitral valve prolapse (displacement)

Braunwald, Eugene, ed. Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. “Valsalva’s Maneuver.” In Everything You Need to Know About Medical Treatments. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corp., 1996.

• mitral valve insufficiency (regurgitation)

Tish Davidson

• mitral valve stenosis (narrowing) • aortic valve insufficiency • aortic valve stenosis • tricuspid valve insufficiency • tricuspid valve stenosis • pulmonic stenosis • pulmonic insufficiency

Valvular heart disease Definition Valvular heart disease refers to several disorders and diseases of the heart valves, which are the tissue flaps that regulate the flow of blood through the four chambers of the heart.

Description The human heart consists of four chambers—two upper chambers (the atria) and two lower chambers (the ventricles)—that are responsible for pumping blood. The heart valves are like one-way doors, which open and close with each beat of the heart, controlling the blood flow from one chamber to the next. Each of these valves is made up of a few thin folds of tissue. When functioning correctly, they keep blood from flowing backwards into a chamber when closed. The four valves function in the following manner: • The mitral valve is located between the left atrium and the left ventricle. It is the only valve with two flaps, or cusps. 3472

Certain types of heart disease can lead to one of the specific conditions listed above. These include rheumatic fever and infective inflammation of the heart (endocarditis). Multivalvular heart disease refers to a condition involving more than one of the heart valves.

Causes and symptoms Problems with heart valves may occur as a result of infection, degeneration, or congenital abnormality. The most common infections are rheumatic fever and infective endocarditis. Rheumatic fever Rheumatic fever is a condition that results from the body’s immune response to certain types of streptococcal bacteria. It occurs rarely. When it does occur, it is most often in children who have had strep throat that was not completely treated. The symptoms of rheumatic fever include heart inflammation, uncontrolled movement of limbs and face, arthritis that moves from joint to joint, shortness of breath, weakness, and either lumps under the skin or raised red patches on the skin. The most common valvular heart diseases to result from rheumatic fever GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Valvular heart disease

Left common carotid artery

Left subclavian artery

Brachiocephalic trunk Superior vena acva

Aorta Right pulmonary artery

Trunk of left pulmonary artery

Right pulmonary veins

Left pulmonary veins Left atrium

Semilunar valve Semilunar valve Atrioventricular valve Left ventricle Atrioventricular valve Septum

Right ventricle

Apex of heart Inferior vena cava

Oxygen-poor blood from the upper part of the body

Oxygen-rich blood to the body Oxygen-rich blood Oxygen-poor from the lungs blood to the lungs

oxygen-poor blood from the lower part of the body

ventricles relaxed

ventricles contracted

Anatomy of the human heart. The illustration at the bottom right shows how the right and left ventricles contract and relax when blood is pumped through the heart. (Illustration by Hans & Cassady, Inc.)

are mitral stenosis, tricuspid stenosis, aortic insufficiency, aortic stenosis, multivalvular involvement, and less commonly, pulmonic stenosis. Chronic rheumatic heart disease can result from one occurrence or from repeated attacks. It is not as common as it once was in the United States, but still occurs frequently in developing countries. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Infective endocarditis Infective endocarditis is an infection and inflammation of the inner layer, or membrane, of heart tissue (endocardium). Most people with a healthy, normal heart are not at significant risk for contracting infective endocarditis. However, people who have had rheumatic fever, with its 3473

Valvular heart disease

resulting scarring, or a congenital cause of heart malformation, may contract this disease when certain bacteria enter the bloodstream and become lodged in the heart. In particular, dental surgery or any surgery involving the mouth, bladder, prostate, or female pelvic organs increases risk for this infection. The disease may also occur in drug addicts who inject their veins using unsterilized needles, even if they have normal heart valves. Symptoms of infective endocarditis include fever, a new or changing heart murmur, and abnormal loss of appetite or fatigue. The use of appetite suppressants In 1997 and early 1998, research was underway to determine if fen-phen, the abbreviation for a combination of the two weight-loss drugs fenfluramine and phentermine, caused heart valve problems in some patients. Physicians were concerned that this drug combination could affect the heart valves because the drugs alter metabolism of serotonin in the body. Serotonin is a natural substance found in the brain and intestines that can affect blood vessels. Until the issue could be studied more, physicians recommended that patients taper off the drugs, finally stopping them altogether. The drug’s manufacturer removed fenfluramine from the market until further study was conducted. Other valvular heart disease The mitral and aortic valves may also be affected by deposits of calcium in the heart that occurs with aging. This can lead to thickening and leakage of heart valves. Heart attacks can also damage the mitral valve structures. Additionally, certain connective tissue disorders can adversely affect the heart valves, for example, Marfan’s syndrome and myxomatous degeneration.

a blood test indicating heart inflammation. Heart murmurs may be detected from routine examination. Infective endocarditis A diagnosis of infective endocarditis can be obtained through patient history, EKG, ultrasound, or cardiac catheterization. Patients who have developed the disease rapidly may report fever, fatigue, night sweats, chills, and joint inflammation. Those whose disease has developed more slowly will show signs of rapid heart rate, an enlarged spleen, various skin colors or spots, and heart murmur. The physician may order blood tests to determine what is causing the infection. Appetite suppressants People with a history of using appetite suppressants may be sent for EKGs or further testing if any of the symptoms of valvular heart disease, such as swelling, considerable fatigue, or shortness of breath occur.

Treatment The treatment of specific valvular heart diseases will vary, depending on the valve involved and the extent of damage or malfunction. Some patients will not require treatment and many will be treated with medication. Sometimes, patients need surgery. If multivalvular disease is suspected or involved, different valves may be evaluated during surgery on one of the affected valves. Rheumatic fever Patients with rheumatic fever will be treated with antibiotics to eliminate streptococcal organisms that may still remain in the heart. Patients may receive antibiotics to prevent further infection, and inflammation may be treated with aspirin or cortisone-like drugs.

Diagnosis Specific types of valvular heart disease are diagnosed using electrocardiography (EKG), echocardiography, certain x-ray studies, and/or cardiac catheterization. An EKG provides a record of electrical changes in the heart muscle during the heartbeat. Echocardiography uses sound waves to make images of the heart. These images can show if there are any abnormalities of the heart valves. Cardiac catheterization is a procedure in which a small tube (called a catheter) is inserted into an artery and passed into the heart. It is used to measure pressure in the heart and the amount of blood pumped by the heart. Rheumatic fever Rheumatic fever may be suspected when a recent throat infection has occurred and other major or minor symptoms appear, such as joint ache, abnormal EKG, or 3474

Infective endocarditis Physicians will use the appropriate antibiotic or some combination of antibiotics to treat infective endocarditis, depending on the type of bacterium that caused the disease. Severe cases of this disease may be corrected by valve replacement surgery. Appetite suppressants The role of appetite suppressants (fen-phen) in valvular heart disease has been under study. As of 1998, these drugs were voluntarily removed from the market.

Prognosis The prognosis for patients with valvular heart disease varies depending on the underlying cause, age and GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Rheumatic fever Patients with rheumatic heart disease face a lifetime of caution over contact with the same bacterium that caused the disease. Since it can cause inflammation of one or more organs or joints, complications can occur. The inflammation of the heart may subside without side effects. Permanent scarring of one or more heart valves is a possibility and may require surgery to repair or replace damaged valves. In severe cases, rheumatic fever can lead to death from heart failure. Infective endocarditis The prognosis for patients with infective endocarditis depends on the underlying heart disease and resulting complications. If the disease further damages heart valves, symptoms may occur for years after initial treatment. Sometimes, endocarditis can result in heart or renal failure. If untreated, it can be fatal. Appetite suppressants As of early 1998, prognosis for patients with valvular heart disease resulting from the use of certain appetite suppressants was still under study. Since it is believed that different valves may be affected, treatment would most likely follow a similar course as that for the specific valvular disease.

Prevention Certain measures can be taken to prevent some valvular disease. However, once valvular heart disease that results from congenital abnormality occurs, it may not be prevented. Steps can be taken to prevent further complications. Rheumatic fever The best prevention for rheumatic fever is prompt and thorough treatment of any suspected streptococcal infection, particularly strep throat in children. A physician should check any sore throat with fever that persists for more than 24 hours. The physician will probably order a throat culture. Completion of the antibiotic treatment even after symptoms diminish is important to be certain the infection is eliminated. Infective endocarditis Anyone who was born with a defective hart valve, those with artificial (prosthetic) valves, or those who GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Congenital—Used to describe a condition or defect present at birth. Stenosis—An abnormal valve condition which is characterized by tightening or narrowing of the opening. Streptococcal (Streptococcus)—Streptococcus is a bacterium that causes infection in people. Its most commonly known strain causes the infection strep throat. Throat culture—A test for strep throat that involves swabbing the back of the throat and sending the swab to a laboratory, which will determine whether bacteria is present.

have had a valve scarred by rheumatic fever, should use prescribed antibiotics by mouth before and after a dental procedure. These patients may also need to receive injected antibiotics prior to procedures involving the bladder, prostate, and pelvic organs. Appetite suppressants The drug associated with valvular heart disease, fenfluramine, was not available on the market as of mid1998. Resources BOOKS

Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment, 1996. 35th ed. Ed. Stephen McPhee, et al. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1995. ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. . National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105, Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. . OTHER

Mayo Clinic Online. 5 Mar. 1998 .

Teresa Norris, RN

Valvuloplasty see Heart valve repair Varicella see Chickenpox Varicocele removal see Testicular surgery 3475

Valvular heart disease

health of the patient, and the degree of valvular damage or involvement.

Varicose veins

Varicose veins Definition Varicose veins are dilated, tortuous, elongated superficial veins that are usually seen in the legs.

Description Varicose veins, also called varicosities, are seen most often in the legs, although they can be found in other parts of the body. Most often, they appear as lumpy, winding vessels just below the surface of the skin. There are three types of veins, superficial veins that are just beneath the surface of the skin, deep veins that are large blood vessels found deep inside muscles, and perforator veins that connect the superficial veins to the deep veins. The superficial veins are the blood vessels most often affected by varicose veins and are the veins seen by eye when the varicose condition has developed. The inside wall of veins have valves that open and close in response to the blood flow. When the left ventricle of the heart pushes blood out into the aorta, it produces the high pressure pulse of the heartbeat and pushes blood throughout the body. Between heartbeats, there is a period of low blood pressure. During the low pressure period, blood in the veins is affected by gravity and wants to flow downward. The valves in the veins prevent this from happening. Varicose veins start when one or more valves fail to close. The blood pressure in that section of vein increases, causing additional valves to fail. This allows blood to pool and stretch the veins, further weakening the walls of the veins. The walls of the affected veins lose their elasticity in response to increased blood pressure. As the vessels weaken, more and more valves are unable to close properly. The veins become larger and wider over time and begin to appear as lumpy, winding chains underneath the skin. Varicose veins can develop in the deep veins also. Varicose veins in the superficial veins are called primary varicosities, while varicose veins in the deep veins are called secondary varicosities.

Causes and symptoms The predisposing causes of varicose veins are multiple, and lifestyle and hormonal factors play a role. Some families seem to have a higher incidence of varicose veins, indicating that there may be a genetic component to this disease. Varicose veins are progressive; as one section of the veins weakens, it causes increased pressure on adjacent sections of veins. These sections often develop varicosities. Varicose veins can appear following pregnancy, thrombophlebitis, congenital blood vessel 3476

Varicose veins on a man’s leg. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

weakness, or obesity, but is not limited to these conditions. Edema of the surrounding tissue, ankles, and calves, is not usually a complication of primary (superficial) varicose veins and, when seen, usually indicates that the deep veins may have varicosities or clots. Varicose veins are a common problem; approximately 15% of the adult population in the United States have varicose veins. Women have a much higher incidence of this disease than men. The symptoms can include aching, pain, itchiness, or burning sensations, especially when standing. In some cases, with chronically bad veins, there may be a brownish discoloration of the skin or ulcers (open sores) near the ankles. A condition that is frequently associated with varicose veins is spider-burst veins. Spider-burst veins are very small veins that are enlarged. They may be caused by back-pressure from varicose veins, but can be caused by other factors. They are frequently associated with pregnancy and there may be hormonal factors associated with their development. They are primarily of cosmetic concern and do not present any medical concerns.

Diagnosis Varicose veins can usually be seen. In cases where varicose veins are suspected, but can not be seen, a physician may frequently detect them by palpation (pressing with the fingers). X rays or ultrasound tests can detect varicose veins in the deep and perforator veins and rule out blood clots in the deep veins. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Figure A

Congenital—Existing at or before birth; a condition that developed while the fetus was in utero or as a consequence of the birth process.

Perforating veins Great saphenous vein

Edema—Swelling caused by a collection of fluid in a tissue or body cavity.

Figure B First incision

Second incision

Hemorrhage—Bleeding from blood vessels. Palpation—The process of examining a patient by touch.

Small end of the vein stripper

Figure C

Large end of the vein stripper Vein

Varicose veins may be surgically removed from the body when they are causing pain and when hemorrhaging or recurrent thrombosis appear. Surgery involves making an incision through the skin at both ends of the section of vein being removed (figure B). A flexible wire is inserted through one end and extended to the other. The wire is then withdrawn, pulling the vein out with it (figure C). (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

Treatment There is no cure for varicose veins. Treatment falls into two classes; relief of symptoms and removal of the affected veins. Symptom relief includes such measures as wearing support stockings, which compress the veins and hold them in place. This keeps the veins from stretching and limits pain. Other measures are sitting down, using a footstool when sitting, avoiding standing for long periods of time, and raising the legs whenever possible. These measures work by reducing the blood pressure in leg veins. Prolonged standing allows the blood to collect under high pressure in the varicose veins. Exercise such as walking, biking, and swimming, is beneficial. When the legs are active, the leg muscles help pump the blood in the veins. This limits the amount of blood that collects in the varicose veins and reduces some of the symptoms. These measures reduce symptoms, but do not stop the disease. Surgery is used to remove varicose veins from the body. It is recommended for varicose veins that are causing pain or are very unsightly, and when hemorrhaging or recurrent thrombosis appear. Surgery involves making an incision through the skin at both ends of the section of vein being removed. A flexible wire is inserted through one end and extended to the other. The wire is then withGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

drawn, pulling the vein out with it. This is called “stripping” and is the most common method to remove superficial varicose veins. As long as the deeper veins are still functioning properly, a person can live without some of the superficial veins. Because of this, stripped varicose veins are not replaced. Injection therapy is an alternate therapy used to seal varicose veins. This prevents blood from entering the sealed sections of the vein. The veins remain in the body, but no longer carry blood. This procedure can be performed on an out-patient basis and does not require anesthesia. It is frequently used if people develop more varicose veins after surgery to remove the larger varicose veins and to seal spider-burst veins for people concerned about cosmetic appearance. Injection therapy is also called sclerotherapy. At one time, a method of injection therapy was used that did not have a good success rate. Veins did not seal properly and blood clots formed. Modern injection therapy is improved and has a much higher success rate.

Prognosis Untreated varicose veins become increasingly large and more obvious with time. Surgical stripping of varicose veins is successful for most patients. Most do not develop new, large varicose veins following surgery. Surgery does not decrease a person’s tendency to develop varicose veins. Varicose veins may develop in other locations after stripping. Resources BOOKS

Alexander, R. W., R. C. Schlant, and V. Fuster, eds. The Heart. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill 1998. Berkow, Robert, ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. 3477

Varicose veins

KEY TERMS

Small saphenous vein

Vasculitis

Larsen, D. E., ed. Mayo Clinic Family Health Book. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc. 1996.

John T. Lohr, PhD

Variola see Smallpox Vascular headache see Migraine headache

Vasculitis Definition Vasculitis refers to a varied group of disorders which all share a common underlying problem of inflammation of a blood vessel or blood vessels. The inflammation may affect any size blood vessel, anywhere in the body. It may affect either arteries and/or veins. The inflammation may be focal, meaning that it affects a single location within a vessel; or it may be widespread, with areas of inflammation scattered throughout a particular organ or tissue, or even affecting more than one organ system in the body.

Description Inflammation is a process which occurs when the immune system of the body responds to either an injury or a foreign invader (virus, bacteria, or fungi). The immune system response involves sending a variety of cells and chemicals to the area in question. Inflammation causes blood vessels in the area to leak, causing swelling. The inflamed area becomes red, hot to the touch, and tender. Antibodies are immune cells which recognize and bind to specific markers (called antigens) on other cells (including bacteria and viruses). These antibody-antigen complexes can then stimulate the immune system to send a variety of other cells and chemicals involved in inflammation to their specific location. Some researchers believe that the damaging process of vasculitis is kicked off by such antibody-antigen complexes. These complexes are deposited along the walls of the blood vessels. The resulting inflow of immune cells and chemicals causes inflammation within the blood vessels. The type of disease caused by vasculitis varies depending on a number of factors: • the organ system or tissue in which the vasculitis occurs • the specific type of inflammatory response provoked • whether the affected vessels are veins (which bring blood to the heart) or arteries (which carry blood and oxygen from the heart to the organs and tissues) 3478

• the degree to which blood flow within the affected vessel is reduced

Causes and symptoms Some types of vasculitis appear to be due to a type of allergic response to a specific substance (for example, a drug). Other types of vasculitis have no identifiable initiating event. Furthermore, researchers have not been able to consistently identify antibody-antigen complexes in all of the types of diseases caused by vasculitis. The types of antigens responsible for the initial immune response have often gone unidentified as well. Furthermore, not all people with such complexes deposited along the blood vessels go on to develop vasculitis. Some researchers believe that, in addition to the presence of immune complexes, an individual must have some other characteristics which make him or her susceptible to vasculitis. Many questions have yet to be answered to totally explain the development these diseases. Symptoms Symptoms of vasculitis depend on the severity of the inflammation and the organ system or systems affected. Some types of vasculitis are so mild that the only symptoms noted are small reddish-purple dots (called petechiae) on the skin due to tiny amounts of blood seeping out of leaky blood vessels. In more widespread types of vasculitis, the patient may have general symptoms of illness, including fever, achy muscles and joints, decreased appetite, weight loss, and loss of energy. The organ systems affected by vasculitis may include: • The skin. Rashes, bumps under the skin, petechiae, larger reddish-purple circles (purpura), or bruising (ecchymoses) may appear. Areas of skin totally deprived of blood flow, and therefore of oxygen, may die, resulting in blackened areas of gangrene. • The joints. In addition to joint pain, the joints themselves may become inflamed, resulting in arthritis. • Brain and nervous system. Inflammation of the blood vessels in the brain can cause headaches, changes in personality, confusion, and seizures. If an area of the brain becomes totally deprived of oxygen, a stroke occurs. A stroke means that an area of brain tissue is either severely injured or completely dead from lack of oxygen. This may leave the individual with a permanent disability. If the vessels that lead to the eyes are affected, vision may become seriously disturbed. Nerves in the arms and legs may result in painful tingling sensations, loss of feeling, and weakness. • Gastrointestinal system. Patients may have significant abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea. If blood flow GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vasculitis

is completely cut off to an area of intestine, that part of the intestine will die off. The liver may be affected. • Heart. This is an extremely serious type of vasculitis. The arteries of the heart (coronary arteries) may develop weakened areas, called aneurysms. The heart muscle itself may become inflamed and enlarged. With oxygen deprivation of the heart muscle, the individual may suffer a heart attack. • Lungs. The patient may experience shortness of breath with chest pain, and may cough up blood. There may be wheezing. • Kidney. Changes in the arteries of the kidney may result in high blood pressure. The kidneys may become increasingly unable to appropriately filter the blood, and kidney failure may occur. Specific diseases Multiple types of disease are associated with vasculitis. Many autoimmune diseases have vasculitis as one of their complications. These include systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, and polymyositis. Other types of diseases which have vasculitis as their major manifestations include: • Polyarteritis nodosa. This is an extremely serious, systemic (affecting systems throughout the body) form of vasculitis. Small and medium arteries are involved, and the inflammation is so severe that the walls of the arteries may be destroyed. Any organ system, or multiple organ systems, may be affected. The most serious effects include kidney failure, complications involving the heart, gastrointestinal problems, and high blood pressure. • Kawasaki’s disease is an acute disease which primarily strikes young children. Fever and skin manifestations occur in all patients. While most patients recover completely, a few patients suffer from vasculitis in the heart. This is frequently fatal. • Henoch-Schonlein purpura. While this frequently occurs in children, adults may also be affected. This disease tends to affect the skin, joints, gastrointestinal tract, and kidneys. • Serum sickness occurs when an individual reacts to a component of a drug, for example penicillin. Symptoms of this are often confined to the skin, although fevers, joint pain, and swelling of lymph nodes may also occur. • Temporal arteritis (also called giant cell arteritis) tends to involve arteries which branch off the major artery that leads to the head, called the carotid. An artery which feeds tissues in the area of the temple (the temporal artery) is often affected. Severe headaches are GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

This person’s legs are afflicted with leukocytoblastic vasculitis, a condition in which a blood or lymph vessel becomes inflamed. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

the most classic symptom. Other symptoms include fatigue, loss of appetite and then weight, fever, heavy sweating, joint pain, and pain in the muscles of the neck, shoulders, and back. If the vasculitis includes arteries which supply the eye, serious visual disturbance or even blindness may result. • Takayasu’s arteritis affects the aorta (the very large main artery that exits the heart and receives all of the blood to be delivered throughout the body), and arteries which branch off of the aorta. Initial symptoms include fatigue, fever, sweating at night, joint pain, and loss of appetite and weight. Every organ may be affected by this disease. A common sign of this disease is the inability to feel the pulse in any of the usual locations (the pulse is the regular, rhythmic sensation one can feel with a finger over an artery, for example in the wrist, which represents the beating of the heart and the regular flow of blood). 3479

Vasculitis

KEY TERMS Aneurysm—A weakened area in the wall of a blood vessel which causes an outpouching or bulge. Aneurysms may be fatal if these weak areas burst, resulting in uncontrollable bleeding. Antibody—Specialized cells of the immune system which can recognize organisms that invade the body (such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi). The antibodies are then able to set off a complex chain of events designed to kill these foreign invaders. Antigen—A special, identifying marker on the outside of cells. Autoimmune disorder—A disorder in which the body’s antibodies mistake the body’s own tissues for foreign invaders. The immune system therefore attacks and causes damage to these tissues. Immune system—The system of specialized organs, lymph nodes, and blood cells throughout the body which work together to prevent foreign invaders (bacteria, viruses, fungi, etc.) from taking hold and growing. Inflammation—The body’s response to tissue damage. Includes hotness, swelling, redness, and pain in the affected part. Petechia—A tiny, purplish-red spot on the skin. Caused by the leakage of a bit of blood out of a vessel and under the skin. Purpura—A large, purplish-red circle on the skin. Caused by the leakage of blood out of a vessel and under the skin.

complexes and/or antibodies circulating in the blood. An x-ray procedure, called angiography, involves injecting dye into a major artery, and then taking x-ray pictures to examine the blood vessels, in order to demonstrate the presence of inflammation of the vessel walls. Tissue samples (biopsies) may be taken from affected organs to demonstrate inflammation.

Treatment Even though there are many different types of vasculitis, with many different symptoms based on the organ system affected, treatments are essentially the same. They all involve trying to decrease the activity of the immune system. Steroid medications (like prednisone) are usually the first types of drugs used. Steroids work by interfering with the chemicals involved in the inflammatory process. More potent drugs for severe cases of vasculitis have more serious side effects. These include drugs like cyclophosphamide. Cyclophosphamide works by actually killing cells of the patient’s immune system.

Prognosis The prognosis for vasculitis is quite variable. Some mild forms of vasculitis, such as those brought on by reactions to medications, may resolve totally on their own and not even require treatment. Temporal arteritis, serum sickness, Henoch-Schonlein purpura, and Kawasaki’s disease usually have excellent prognoses, although when Kawasaki’s affects the heart, there is a high death rate. Other types of vasculitis were always fatal, prior to the availability of prednisone and cyclophosphamide, and continue to have high rates of fatal complications. These include polyarteritis nodosa and Wegener’s granulomatosis.

Prevention • Wegener’s granulomatosis: This disease exerts its most serious effects on the respiratory tract. The vasculitis produced by this disease includes the formation of fibrous, scarring nodules called granulomas. Symptoms include nose bleeds, ear infections, cough, shortness of breath, and chest pain. There may be bleeding in the lungs, and a patient may cough up blood. The kidneys, eyes, and skin are also frequently involved.

Diagnosis Diagnosis of any type of vasculitis involves demonstrating the presence of a strong inflammatory process. Tests which reveal inflammation throughout the body include erythrocyte sedimentation rate, blood tests which may reveal anemia and increased white blood cells, and tests to demonstrate the presence of immune 3480

Because so little is known about what causes a particular individual to develop vasculitis, there are no known ways to prevent it. Resources BOOKS

Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. “Vasculitides.” In Cecil Essentials of Medicine, ed. Thomas E. Andreoli, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. PERIODICALS

Bush, Thomas M. “Systemic Vasculitis: Diagnostic Clues to this Confusing Array of Diseases.” Postgraduate Medicine 103, no. 2 (Feb. 1998): 68+. Jennette, J. Charles. “Small-Cell Vasculitis.” The New England Journal of Medicine 337, no. 21 (20 Nov. 1997): 1512+. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vasectomy

Ledford, Dennis K. “Immunologic aspects of Vasculitis and Cardiovascular Disease.” The Journal of the American Medical Association 278, no. 22 (10 Dec. 1997): 1962+. Watts, R. A., and D. G. I. Scott. “Rashes and Vasculitis.” British Medical Journal 310, no. 6987 (29 Apr. 1995): 1128+.

Bladder

ORGANIZATIONS

Lupus Foundation of America. 1300 Piccard Dr., Suite 200, Rockville, MD 20850. (800) 558-0121. . Wegener’s Foundation, Inc. 3705 South George Mason Drive, Suite 1813 South, Falls Church, VA 22041. (703) 931-5852.

Prostate gland

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Vas deferens (severed)

Urethra

Vasectomy Testis

Definition A vasectomy is a surgical procedure performed on males in which the vas deferens (tubes that carry sperm from the testicles to the seminal vesicles) are cut, tied, cauterized (burned or seared) or otherwise interrupted. The semen no longer contains sperm after the tubes are cut, so conception cannot occur. The testicles continue to produce sperm, but they die and are absorbed by the body.

Vasectomy is a surgical procedure performed on males in which the vas deferens (tubes that conduct sperm from the testicles to the penis) are cut, tied, cauterized, or otherwise interrupted. Although the testicles still produce sperm, the sperm die and are absorbed by the body. Men who have had vasectomies may continue to ejaculate the same amount of semen as before the procedure. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

Purpose The purpose of this operation is to provide reliable contraception. Research indicates that the level of effectiveness is 99.6%. Vasectomy is the most reliable method of contraception.

Description Vasectomies are often performed in the doctor’s office using a local anesthesia. The patient’s scrotum area will be shaved and cleaned with an antiseptic solution to reduce the chance of infection. A small incision is made into the scrotum (the sac containing the testicles that produce the sperm). Each of the vas deferens (one from each testicle) is tied in two places with nonabsorbable (permanent) sutures and the tube is severed between the ties. The ends may be cauterized (burned or seared) to decrease the chance that they will leak or grow back together. Sterility does not occur immediately after the procedure is finished. Men must use other methods of contraception until two consecutive semen analyses confirm that there are no sperm present in the semen. This will take four to six weeks or 15-20 ejaculations to clear all of the sperm from the tubes. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

“No scalpel” vasectomies are gaining popularity. Instead of an incision, a small puncture is made into the scrotum. The vas deferens are cut and sealed in a manner similar to that described above. No stitches are necessary and the patient has less pain. Other advantages include less damage to the tissues, less bleeding, less risk of infection, and less discomfort after the procedure. In some, cases vasectomies may be reversed. However, this procedure should be considered permanent as there is no guarantee of successful reversal.

Preparation No special physical preparation is required. The physician will first assess the patient’s general health in order to identify any potential problems that could occur. The doctor will then explain possible risks and side effects. The patient is asked to sign a consent form which indicates that he understands the information he has received, and gives the doctor permission to perform the operation.

Aftercare Following the surgery, ice packs are often applied to scrotum to decrease pain and swelling. A dressing 3481

Vasodilators

Resources

KEY TERMS Ejaculation—The act of expelling the sperm through the penis during orgasm. Epididymitis—Inflammation of the small tube that rests on top of the testicle and is part of the system that carries sperm from the testicle to the penis. The condition can be successfully treated with antibiotics if necessary. Scrotum—The sac which contains the testicles.

BOOKS

Nichols, Francine H., and Elaine Zwelling. Maternal-Newborn Nursing: Theory and Practice. Philadelpia.: W. B.Saunders Co., 1997. Olds, Sally B., Marcia L. London, and Patricia Wieland Ladewig. Maternal-Newborn Nursing: A Family Centered Approach. Menlo Park, CA.: Addison-Wesley, 1996. ORGANIZATIONS

Planned Parenthood League of Massachusetts. (800) 258-4448. .

Sperm granuloma—A collection of fluid that leaks from an improperly sealed or tied vas deferens. They usually disappear on their own, but can be drained if necessary. Testicles—The two egg-shaped organs found in the scrotum that produce sperm. Tubal ligation—A surgical procedure in which the fallopian tubes are tied in two places and cut between. This prevents eggs from moving from the ovary to the uterus.

Donald G. Barstow, RN

Vasodilators Definition Vasodilators are medicines that act directly on muscles in blood vessel walls to make blood vessels widen (dilate).

Purpose (or athletic supporter) which supports the scrotum can also reduce pain. Mild over-the-counter pain medication such as aspirin or acetaminophen (Tylenol) should be able to control any discomfort. Activities may be restricted for one to two days, and sexual intercourse for three to four days.

Risks There are very few risks associated with vasectomy other than infection, bruising, epididymitis (inflammation of the tube that carries the sperm from the testicle to the penis), and sperm granulomas (collection of fluid that leaks from a poorly sealed or tied vas deferens). These are easily treated if they do occur. Patients do not experience difficulty achieving an erection, maintaining an erection, or ejaculating. There is no decrease in the production of the male hormone (testosterone), and sex drive and ability are not altered. Vasectomy is safer and less expensive than tubal ligation (sterilization of a female by cutting the fallopian tube to prevent conception).

Normal results Normally, vasectomies are 99% successful in preventing conception. As such, it is one of the most effective methods available to consumers. 3482

Vasodilators are used to treat high blood pressure (hypertension). By widening the arteries, these drugs allow blood to flow through more easily, reducing blood pressure. Controlling high blood pressure is important because the condition puts a burden on the heart and the arteries, which can lead to permanent damage over time. If untreated, high blood pressure increases the risk of heart attacks, heart failure, stroke, or kidney failure. Vasodilators usually are prescribed with other types of blood pressure drugs and rarely are used alone.

Description Examples of vasodilators are hydralazine (Apresoline) and minoxidil (Loniten). The vasodilator hydralazine also may be used to control high blood pressure in pregnant women or to bring down extremely high blood pressure in emergency situations. In the forms used for treating high blood pressure (tablets or injections), these drugs are available only with a physician’s prescription. A liquid form of minoxidil, used to promote hair growth in people with certain kinds of baldness and is applied directly to the scalp, is sold without a prescription.

Recommended dosage The recommended dosage depends on the type of vasodilator. Check with the physician who prescribed the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Physicians usually prescribe vasodilators along with other blood pressure medicines. Taking each drug at the correct time is extremely important. Health care providers can offer suggestions of ways to remember when to take each drug.

Precautions Seeing a physician regularly while taking a vasodilator is important, especially during the first few months. The physician will check to make sure the medicine is working as it should and will watch for unwanted side effects. People who have high blood pressure often feel fine. But even when they feel well, patients should keep seeing their physicians and taking their medicine. Vasodilators will not cure high blood pressure, but will help control the condition. To avoid the serious health problems that high blood pressure can cause, patients may have to take medicine for the rest of their lives. Furthermore, medicine alone may not be enough. People with high blood pressure may also need to avoid certain foods and keep their weight under control. The health care professional who is treating the condition can offer advice on what measures may be necessary. Some people feel dizzy or have headaches while using this medicine. These problems are especially likely to occur in older people, who are more sensitive than younger people to the medicine’s effects. Anyone who takes these drugs should not drive, use machines, or do anything else that might be dangerous until they know how the drugs affect them. Special conditions People who have certain medical conditions or who are taking certain other medicines may have problems if they take vasodilators. Before taking these drugs, be sure to let the physician know about any of these conditions: ALLERGIES. Anyone who has had an unusual reac-

tion to a vasodilator in the past should let his or her physician know before taking this type of drug again. The physician should also be told about any allergies to foods, dyes, preservatives, or other substances. PREGNANCY. Several problems—from excess hair

growth to blood abnormalities—have been reported in babies whose mothers take this vasodilators during pregnancy. In studies of laboratory animals, hydralazine causes birth defects in mice and rabbits, but not in rats. The effects of taking vasodilators during pregnancy have not been specifically studied in humans. Women who are GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

pregnant or who may become pregnant should check with their physicians before using this medicine. Women who become pregnant while taking a vasodilator should tell their physicians right away. BREASTFEEDING. Women who are breastfeeding their babies or who plan to breastfeed should check with their physicians before using this medicine. OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS. Using a vasodilator to lower blood pressure may worsen the problems that result from heart disease, blood vessel disease, or a recent heart attack or stroke. This medicine may also make angina (chest pain) worse. And in people with pheochromocytoma (tumor of the adrenal medulla), vasodilators may make the tumor more active. Before using a vasodilator, people with any of these medical problems should make sure their physicians are aware of their conditions.

People with kidney disease should also check with their physicians before using a vasodilator. Side effects may be greater in these people because their kidneys are slow to clear the medicine from the body. USE OF CERTAIN MEDICINES. Taking vasodilators with certain other drugs may affect the way the drugs work or may increase the chance of side effects. Do not take any other prescription or nonprescription (over-thecounter) medicine with a vasodilator unless it has been discussed with the physician who prescribed the vasodilator.

Side effects Some side effects of vasodilators go away as the body adjusts to the drug and do not need medical attention unless they continue or they interfere with normal activities. These include: • headache • nausea or vomiting • diarrhea • loss of appetite In addition, minoxidil may cause a temporary increase in hair growth, especially on the face, arms, and back. Patients who are bothered by this should check with their physicians. Other side effects of vasodilators should have medical attention. Check with a physician immediately if a fast or irregular heartbeat occurs. And if any of the following problems occur, check with a physician as soon as possible: • chest pain • muscle pain 3483

Vasodilators

drug or the pharmacist who filled the prescription for the correct dosage, and use the medicine only as directed.

Vegetarianism

KEY TERMS Adrenal gland—One of a pair of organs located next to the kidneys. The adrenal glands produce hormones that control many body functions. Adrenal medulla—The inner part of the adrenal gland. The adrenal medulla produces the hormones epinephrine (adrenaline), which stimulates the heart, tightens blood vessels, and relaxes some smooth muscles; and norepinephrine, which has similar effects. Arteries—Blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart to the cells, tissues, and organs of the body.

• joint pain • pain, numbness, tingling or weakness in the hands or feet • swollen feet or lower legs • swollen lymph nodes • bloating • fever and sore throat • general discomfort or feeling of illness • weakness • blisters on skin; skin rash or itching; flushing or redness of the skin Additional side effects are possible. Anyone who has unusual symptoms while taking a vasodilator should get in touch with his or her physician.

Vegetarianism Definition Vegetarianism is the voluntary abstinence from eating meat. Vegetarians refrain from eating meat for various reasons, including religious, health, and ethical ones. Lacto-ovo vegetarians supplement their diet with dairy (lactose) products and eggs (ovo). Vegans (pronounced vee-guns) do not eat any animal-derived products at all.

Purpose Vegetarianism is recommended as a dietary therapy for a variety of conditions, including heart disease, high cholesterol, diabetes, and stroke. Vegetarianism is a major dietary therapy in the alternative treatment of cancer. Other conditions treated with a dietary therapy of vegetarianism include obesity, osteoporosis, arthritis, allergies, asthma, environmental illness, hypertension, gout, gallstones, hemorrhoids, kidney stones, ulcers, colitis, premenstrual syndrome, anxiety, and depression. Vegetarians often report higher energy levels, better digestion, and mental clarity. Vegetarianism is an economical and easily implemented preventative practice as well.

Description

Interactions Vasodilators may interact with other medicines. When this happens, the effects of one or both of the drugs may change or the chance of side effects may be greater. In addition, many prescription and nonprescription (over-the-counter) drugs may affect blood pressure. Do not take any other medicine without the approval of the physician who prescribed the vasodilator. In particular, avoid using over-the-counter medicines for appetite control, colds, cough, sinus problems, asthma, hay fever and other allergies, as these may increase blood pressure. At the other extreme, dangerously low blood pressure may result when drugs such as the blood pressure medicine guanethidine (Ismelin) or nitrates, used to treat chest pain, are combined with vasodilators. Nancy Ross-Flanigan 3484

Vasodilatory see Shock Vasopressin test see Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) test Vasovagal faint see Fainting

The term vegetarian was coined in 1847 by the founders of the Vegetarian Society of Great Britain, but vegetarianism has been around as long as people have created diets. Some of the world’s oldest cultures advocate a vegetarian diet for health and religious purposes. In India, millions of Hindus are vegetarians because of their religious beliefs. One of the ancient mythological works of Hinduism, the Mahabharata, states that, “Those who desire to possess good memory, beauty, long life with perfect health, and physical, moral and spiritual strength, should abstain from animal foods.” The yoga system of living and health is vegetarian, because its dietary practices are based on the belief that healthy food contains prana. Prana is the universal life energy, which yoga experts believe is abundant in fresh fruits, grains, nuts and vegetables, but absent in meat because meat has been killed. Yogis also believe that spiritual health is influenced by the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

New York where he received his medical degree in 1875. In 1876, at the age of 24, Kellogg became an abdominal surgeon and superintendent of the Western Health Reform Institute, which he renamed the Battle Creek Sanitarium. There, he began applying his theories about natural living to his medical practice. Himself a vegetarian, he first advocated a diet high in whole grains, fruits, nuts, and legumes. He later included all types of vegetables in the diet. His controversial health regimen included morning calisthenics, open-air sleeping, cleansing enemas, chewing food hundreds of times before swallowing, and drinking plenty of water.

(AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced by permission.)

John Harvey Kellogg is known as the father of modern breakfast cereal. He was born in Tyrone Township, Michigan, on February 26, 1852, into a Seventh Day Adventist family. At age 12, he became an apprentice at the Review and Herald Press, a publishing company run by the church. He attended school in Battle Creek, Michigan. He attended Bellevue Hospital Medical College in

practice of ahimsa, or not harming living beings. The principle of ahimsa (non-violence) appears in the Upanishads (Vedic literature) from c. 600–300 B.C. Taking of animal life or human life under any circumstances is sinful and results in rebirth as a lower organism. It became a fundamental element of Jainism, another religion of India. Some Buddhists in Japan and China are also vegetarian because of spiritual beliefs. In the Christian tradition, the Trappist Monks of the Catholic Church are vegetarian, and some vegetarians argue that there is evidence that Jesus and his early followers were vegetarian. Other traditional cultures, such as those in the Middle East and the Mediterranean regions, have evolved diets that frequently consist of vegetarian foods. The Mediterranean diet, which a Harvard study declared to be one of the world’s healthiest, is primarily, although not strictly, vegetarian. The list of famous vegetarians forms an illustrious group. The ancient Greek philosophers, including Socrates, Plato, and Pythagoras, advocated vegetarianism. In modern GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

In the 1890s, Kellogg established a laboratory at the sanitarium to develop more nutritious foods. His brother, Will Keith Kellogg, joined in his research. In 1895 they developed a breakfast cereal of wheat flakes called Granose. The cereal quickly grew in popularity and was soon sold by mail order. This was followed by rice flakes and corn flakes. The brothers established the Sanitas Food Company. But philosophical differences led them to split into two companies. Will founded the W. K. Kellogg Company, which retained the rights to the cereal products. John set up the Battle Creek Food Company, which produced coffee substitutes and soymilk. John Kellogg also edited Good Health Magazine, which promoted vegetarianism, for 60 years. In 1904, he published a book, The Miricle of Life. He continued to promote his version of healthy living and radical techniques until his death in 1943.

times, the word to describe someone who likes to feast on food and wine is “epicure,” but it is little known that Epicurus, the ancient philosopher, was himself a diligent vegetarian. Other famous vegetarians include Leonardo da Vinci, Sir Isaac Newton, Leo Tolstoy, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and Henry Thoreau. This century’s celebrated vegetarians include Gandhi, the physician Albert Schweitzer, writer George Bernard Shaw, musician Paul McCartney, and champion triathlete Dave Scott. Albert Einstein, although not a strict vegetarian himself, stated that a vegetarian diet would be an evolutionary step for the human race. Vegetarianism in America received a lot of interest during the last half of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century, during periods of experimentation with diets and health practices. Vegetarianism has also been a religious practice for some Americans, including the Seventh-day Adventists, whose lacto-ovo vegetarian diets have been studied for their health benefits. Vegetarianism has been steadily gaining acceptance as an alterna3485

Vegetarianism

D R . J O H N H A RV E Y K E L L O G G ( 1 8 5 2 – 1 9 4 3 )

Vegetarianism

tive to the meat-and-potatoes bias of the traditional American diet. In 1997, Vegetarian Resource Group performed a Roper poll that showed that 13 million Americans, or 5% of the population, identified themselves as vegetarians. Several factors contribute to the interest in vegetarianism in America. Outbreaks of food poisoning from meat products, as well as increased concern over the additives in meat such as hormones and antibiotics, have led some people and professionals to question meat’s safety. There is also an increased awareness of the questionable treatment of farm animals in factory farming. But the growing health consciousness of Americans is probably the major reason for the surge in interest in vegetarianism. Nutrition experts have built up convincing evidence that there are major problems with the conventional American diet, which is centered around meat products that are high in cholesterol and saturated fat and low in fiber. Heart disease, cancer, and diabetes, which cause 68% of all deaths in America, are all believed to be influenced by this diet. Nutritionists have repeatedly shown in studies that a healthy diet consists of plenty of fresh vegetables and fruits, complex carbohydrates such as whole grains, and foods that are high in fiber and low in cholesterol and saturated fat. Vegetarianism, a diet that fulfills all these criteria, has become part of many healthy lifestyles. In alternative medicine, vegetarianism is a cornerstone dietary therapy, used in Ayurvedic medicine, detoxification treatments, macrobiotics, the Ornish diet for heart disease, and in therapies for many chronic conditions.

Preparations Some people, particularly those with severe or chronic conditions such as heart disease or cancer, may be advised by a health practitioner to become vegetarian suddenly. For most people, nutritionists recommend that a vegetarian diet be adopted gradually, to allow people’s bodies and lifestyles time to adjust to new eating habits and food intake. Some nutritionists have designed transition diets to help people become vegetarian in stages. Many Americans eat meat products at nearly every meal, and the first stage of a transition diet is to substitute just a few meals a week with wholly vegetarian foods. Then, particular meat products can be slowly reduced and eliminated from the diet and replaced with vegetarian foods. Red meat can be reduced and then eliminated, followed by pork, poultry, and fish. For those wishing to become pure vegetarians or vegans, the final step would be to substitute eggs and dairy products with other nutrient-rich foods. Individuals should be willing to experiment with transition diets, and should have patience when learning how combine vegetarianism with social activities such as dining out. 3486

The transition to vegetarianism can be smoother for those who make informed choices with dietary practices. Sound nutritional guidelines include decreasing the intake of fat, increasing fiber, and emphasizing fresh fruits, vegetables, legumes, and whole grains in the diet while avoiding processed foods and sugar. Everyone can improve their health by becoming familiar with recommended dietary and nutritional practices, such as reading labels and understanding basic nutritional concepts such as daily requirements for calories, protein, fat, and nutrients. Would-be vegetarians can experiment with meat substitutes, foods that are high in protein and essential nutrients. Thanks to the growing interest in vegetarianism, many meat substitutes are now readily available. Tofu and tempeh are products made from soybeans that are high in protein, calcium, and other nutrients. There are “veggie-burgers” that can be grilled like hamburgers, and vegetarian substitutes for turkey and sausage with surprisingly authentic textures and taste. There are many vegetarian cookbooks on the market as well.

Precautions In general, a well-planned vegetarian diet is healthy and safe. However, vegetarians, and particularly vegans who eat no animal products, need to be aware of particular nutrients that may be lacking in non-animal diets. These are amino acids, vitamin B12, vitamin D, calcium, iron, zinc, and essential fatty acids. Furthermore, pregnant women, growing children, and those with health conditions have higher requirements for these nutrients. Vegetarians should be aware of getting complete protein in their diets. A complete protein contains all of the essential amino acids, which are the building blocks for protein essential to the diet because the body cannot make them. Meat and dairy products generally contain complete proteins, but most vegetarian foods such as grains and legumes contain incomplete proteins, lacking one or more of the essential amino acids. However, vegetarians can easily overcome this by combining particular foods in order to create complete proteins. For instance, beans are high in the amino acid lysine but low in tryptophan and methionine, but rice is low in lysine and high in tryptophan and methionine. Thus, combining rice and beans makes a complete protein. In general, combining legumes such as soy, lentils, beans, and peas with grains like rice, wheat, or oats forms complete proteins. Eating dairy products or nuts with grains also makes proteins complete. Oatmeal with milk on it is complete, as is peanut butter on whole wheat bread. Proteins do not necessarily need to be combined in the same meal, but generally within four hours. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vitamin D can be obtained by vitamins, fortified foods, and sunshine. Calcium can be obtained in enriched tofu, seeds, nuts, legumes, dairy products, and dark green vegetables including broccoli, kale, spinach, and collard greens. Iron is found in raisins, figs, legumes, tofu, whole grains (particularly whole wheat), potatoes, and dark green leafy vegetables. Iron is absorbed more efficiently by the body when iron-containing foods are eaten with foods that contain vitamin C, such as fruits, tomatoes, and green vegetables. Zinc is abundant in nuts, pumpkin seeds, legumes, whole grains, and tofu. For vegetarians who don’t eat fish, getting enough omega-3 essential fatty acids may be an issue, and supplements such as flaxseed oil should be considered, as well as eating walnuts and canola oil. Vegetarians do not necessarily have healthier diets. Some studies have shown that some vegetarians consume large amounts of cholesterol and saturated fat. Eggs and dairy products contain cholesterol and saturated fat, while nuts, oils, and avocados are vegetable sources of saturated fat. To reap the full benefits of a vegetarian diet, vegetarians should be conscious of cholesterol and saturated fat intake. Vegetarians may also consider buying organic foods, which are grown without the use of synthetic chemicals, as another health precaution.

Research and general acceptance A vegetarian diet has many well-documented health benefits. It has been shown that vegetarians have a higher life expectancy, as much as several years, than those who eat a meat-centered diet. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has stated that data has shown vegetarians to have a strong or significant probability against contracting obesity, heart disease, lung cancer, colon cancer, alcoholism, hypertension, diabetes, gallstones, gout, kidney stones, and ulcers. However, the FDA also points out that vegetarians tend to have healthy lifestyle habits, so other factors may contribute to their increased health besides diet alone. A vegetarian diet, as prescribed by Dr. Dean Ornish, has been shown to improve heart disease and reverse the effects of atherosclerosis, or hardening of the arteries. It should be noted that Dr. Ornish’s diet was used in conjunction with exercise, stress reduction, and other holistic methods. The Ornish diet is lacto-ovo vegetarian, because it allows the use of egg whites and non-fat dairy products. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vegetarians have a resource of statistics in their favor when it comes to presenting persuasive arguments in favor of their eating habits. Vegetarians claim that a vegetarian diet is a major step in improving the health of citizens and the environment. Americans eat over 200 lbs (91 kg) of meat per person per year. The incidence of heart disease, cancer diabetes, and other diseases has increased along with a dramatic increase in meat consumption during the past century. Many statistics show significantly smaller risks for vegetarians contracting certain conditions. The risks of women getting breast cancer and men contracting prostrate cancer are nearly four times as high for frequent meat eaters as for those who eat meat sparingly or not at all. For heart attacks, American men have a 50% risk of having one, but the risk drops down to 15% for lacto-ovo vegetarians and to only 4% for vegans. For cancer, studies of populations around the world have implied that plant-based diets have lower associated risks for certain types of cancer. Vegetarians claim other reasons for adopting a meatfree diet. One major concern is the amount of pesticides and synthetic additives such as hormones that show up in meat products. Chemicals tend to accumulate in the tissue of animals that are higher in the food chain, a process called bioaccumulation. Vegetarians, by not eating meat, can avoid the exposure to these accumulated toxins, many of which are known to influence the development of cancer. One study showed that DDT, a cancer-causing pesticide, was present in significant levels in mother’s milk for 99% of American women, but only 8% of vegetarian women had significant levels of the pesticide. Women who eat meat had 35 times higher levels of particular pesticides than vegetarian women. The synthetic hormones and antibiotics added to American cattle has led some European countries to ban American beef altogether. The widespread use of antibiotics in livestock has made many infectious agents more resistant to them, making some diseases harder to treat. Vegetarians resort to ethical and environmental arguments as well when supporting their food choices. Much of U.S. agriculture is dedicated to producing meat, which is an expensive and resource-depleting practice. It has been estimated that 1.3 billion people could be fed with the grain that America uses to feed livestock, and starvation is a major problem in world health. Producing meat places a heavy burden on natural resources, as compared to growing grain and vegetables. One acre of land can grow approximately 40,000 lbs (18,000 kg) of potatoes or 250 lbs (113 kg) of beef, and it takes 50,000 gal (200,000 l) of water to produce 1 lb (0.45 kg) of California beef but only 25 gal (100 l) of water to produce 1 lb (0.45 kg) of wheat. Half of all water used in America is for livestock production. Vegetarians argue that the 3487

Vegetarianism

Getting enough vitamin B12 may be an issue for some vegetarians, particularly vegans, because meat and dairy products are the main sources. Vitamin supplements that contain vitamin B12 are recommended. Spirulina, a nutritional supplement made from algae, is also a vegetarian source, as are fortified soy products and nutritional yeast.

Vegetative state

KEY TERMS Cholesterol—A steroid fat found in animal foods that is also produced in the body from saturated fat for several important functions. Excess cholesterol intake is linked to many diseases. Complex carbohydrates—Complex carbohydrates are broken down by the body into simple sugars for energy, are found in grains, fruits and vegetables. They are generally recommended in the diet over refined sugar and honey, because they are a more steady source of energy and often contain fiber and nutrients as well.

Null, Gary. The Vegetarian Handbook. New York: St. Martins, 1987. Robbins, John. Diet for a New America. Walpole, New Hampshire: Stillpoint, 1987. PERIODICALS

Vegetarian Journal. Vegetarian Resource Group (VRG). PO Box 1463, Baltimore, MD 21203. Vegetarian Times. 4 High Ridge Park, Stamford, CT 06905. (877) 321-1796. Vegetarian Nutrition and Health Letter. 1707 Nichol Hall, Loma Linda, CA 92350. (888) 558-8703. ORGANIZATIONS

North American Vegetarian Society (NAVS). PO Box 72, Dolgeville, NY 13329. (518) 568-7970.

Legume—Group of plant foods including beans, peas, and lentils, which are high in protein, fiber, and other nutrients.

Douglas Dupler

Organic food—Food grown without the use of synthetic pesticides and fertilizers. Saturated fat—Fat that is usually solid at room temperature, found mainly in meat and dairy products but also in vegetable sources such as some nuts, seeds, and avocados. Unsaturated fat—Fat found in plant foods that is typically liquid (oil) at room temperature. They can be monounsaturated or polyunsaturated, depending on the chemical structure. Unsaturated fats are the most recommended dietary fats.

American consumption of beef may also be contributing to global warming, by the large amounts of fossil fuels used in its production. The South American rainforest is being cleared to support American’s beef consumption, as the United States yearly imports 300 million lbs (136 million kg) of meat from Central and South America. The production of meat has been estimated as causing up to 85% of the loss of topsoil of America’s farmlands. Despite the favorable statistics, vegetarianism does have its opponents. The meat industry in America is a powerful organization that has spent millions of dollars over decades advertising the benefits of eating meat. Vegetarians point out that life-long eating habits are difficult to change for many people, despite research showing that vegetarian diets can provide the same nutrients as meat-centered diets. Resources BOOKS

Akers, Keith. A Vegetarian Sourcebook. New York: Putnam, 1993. 3488

Vegetative state Definition A coma-like state characterized by open eyes and the appearance of wakefulness is defined as vegetative.

Description The vegetative state is a chronic or long-term condition. This condition differs from a persistent vegetative state (PVS, a state of coma that lacks both awareness and wakefulness) since patients have awakened from coma, but still have not regained awareness. In the vegetative state patients can open their eyelids occasionally and demonstrate sleep-wake cycles. They also completely lack cognitive function. The vegetative state is also called coma vigil.

Causes and symptoms The vegetative state can be caused by: • cardiac arrest • prolonged and profound hypoglycemia (an abnormal and severe decrease in blood sugar) • carbon monoxide poisoning • head injury • brain hemorrhage • compression of the brainstem • tumors • bilateral hemispheric demyelination (a loss of nerve cells) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS

• neurodegenerative diseases • anencephaly (an abnormality of the brain and skull) • diffuse nerve cell injury Patients in a vegetative state apparently have functioning of a special area in the brain called the reticular activating system (RAS) responsible for sleep-wake cycles. The connections that integrate more complex abilities such as awareness are interrupted. Patients in the vegetative state can open and close eyes spontaneously. They may appear to track or follow objects with their eyes. Patients may chew and swallow food placed in the mouth. The vegetative patient does not respond to sound, hunger, or pain. Patients cannot obey verbal commands and lack local motor responses. Additionally these patients cannot talk in comprehendible terms and they may become noisy, restless, and hypermobility. These patients are in a state or arousal but completely lack awareness.

Cognitive— The ability (or lack of) to think, learn, and memorize. Hypermobility— Increased movement of joints.

Resources BOOKS

Goetz, Christopher G., et al, eds. Textbook of Clinical Neurology. 1st ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 1999. Goldman, Lee, et al. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. 21st ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 2000. Miller, Ronald D., et al, eds. Anesthesia. 5th ed. Churchill Livingstone, Inc., 2000. Rosen, Peter. Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 4th ed. Mosby-Tear Book, Inc., 1998.

Laith Farid Gulli, M.D.

Diagnosis Diagnosis of vegetative state depends on the primary cause of brain dysfunction. A comprehensive history and neurological examination, neuroimaging studies, and chemical analysis of the blood are essential. Additionally, special tests such as cerebrospinal fluid (CSF, is the fluid that bathes and nourishes the brain and spinal cord) analysis and electroencephalographic (EEG analyzes the electrical activity within the brain) may be indicated to establish a diagnosis.

Velopharyngeal insufficiency Definition Velopharyngeal insufficiency is the improper closing of the velopharyngeal sphincter (soft palate muscle) during speech characterized by an acute nasal quality of the voice.

Treatment Treatment is directed to presenting symptoms and patient needs. Patients require constant monitoring and assistance with feeding, hydration hygiene, assisted movement (to help prevent ulcers and blood clots in the legs), and elimination of waste products.

Alternative treatment There is no known alternative treatment for vegetative patients.

Description At the back of the mouth is a circle of structures that include the tonsils, the tongue, and the palate. During speech, this apparatus must close off the nose for proper articulation of the explosive consonants “p,” “b,” “g,” “t,” and “d.” If it does not close, there is a snort sound produced through the nose. Improper function of this structure also produces a nasal tone to the voice.

Causes and symptoms Prognosis The prognosis is generally poor and the condition can persist chronically.

Prevention There is no known prevention since this state can occur as a result of unavoidable situations such as an accident, tumor, and bleeding or genetic abnormality. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

There are three main causes for this defect: • Cleft palate is a congenital condition, producing a defect in the palate that allows air to escape upward during speech. • If tonsil and adenoid surgery is done improperly, velopharyngeal insufficiency may result. The occurrence rate is approximately one in every 2,000-3,000 tonsillectomies. 3489

Velopharyngeal insufficiency

• injury of the brain following infections (meningitis or encephalitis)

Vena cava filter

Prognosis

KEY TERMS Adenoids—Lymph glands just above the tonsils and the palate.

The combination of surgery to correct the insufficiency and speech therapy to retrain the voice successfully alleviate velopharyngeal insufficiency.

Cleft palate—Congenital defect marked by a split in the roof of the mouth.

Resources

Nasopharyngoscopy—A diagnostic procedure that examines the nasal passageways and pharynx with an instrument outfitted with an optical system.

English, Gerald M. Otolaryngology. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippencott Co., 1990.

Pharynx—A canal located between the mouth cavity and the esophagus. Tonsillectomy—Surgical removal of the tonsils. Tonsils—Lymph glands in the throat, just behind the back teeth.

• Nerve or muscle disease may paralyze the muscles that operate the velopharyngeal sphincter. The primary symptom is the speech impediment. Some people develop a change in their speaking pattern or a series of facial grimaces to try to overcome the difficulty. If the condition is acute, regurgitation through the nose may occur.

Diagnosis Examination of the velopharyngeal sphincter through ultrasound scans, fiber-optic nasopharyngoscopy, and videofluoroscopy will reveal the extent of velopharyngeal insufficiency. Speech and velopharyngeal sphincter movement are compared to make the diagnosis.

Treatment Velopharyngeal insufficiency is treated with a combination of surgery and speech therapy. There are several surgical procedures that can be performed to correct the physical malfunction. They include: • Pharyngeal flap procedure that moves the skin flap from the pharynx to the soft palate. • Palatal push-back that separates the hard and soft palate in order to lengthen the soft palate. • Pharyngoplasty that lengthens the soft palate by turning the pharyngeal skin flaps. • Augmentation pharyngoplasty that inserts an implant into the pharyngeal wall to enlarge it, thus narrowing the velopharyngeal opening. • Velopharyngeal sphincter reconstruction. 3490

BOOKS

PERIODICALS

Conley, S. F., et al. “Identification and Assessment of Velopharyngeal Inadequacy.” American Journal of Otolaryngology 18 (Jan./Feb. 1997): 38-46. Eufinger, H., et al. “Speech Results and Velopharyngeal Morphology Following 151 Cranially Based Velopharyngoplasties.” Folia Phoniatrica et Logopedica 47 (1995): 193-198. Huang M. H., S. T. Lee, and K. Rajendran. “Anatomic Basis of Cleft Palate and Velopharyngeal Surgery: Implications from a Fresh Cadaveric Study.” Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery 101 (Mar. 1998): 613-627. Morris, H. L., et al. “Clinical Results of Pharyngeal Flap Surgery: the Iowa Experience.” Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery 95 (Apr. 1995): 652-662. Ren, Y. F., A. Isberg, and G. Henningsson. “Velopharyngeal Incompetence and Persistent Hypernasality after Adenoidectomy in Children without Palatal Defect.” Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Journal 32 (Nov. 1995): 476-482. Sell, D., and L. Ma. “A Model of Practice for the Management of Velopharyngeal Dysfunction.” British Journal of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery 34 (Oct. 1996): 357-363.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Vena cava filter Definition A vena cava filter is a device inserted into a major vein to prevent a blood clot from entering the lungs.

Purpose The purpose of a vena cava filter is to prevent a blood clot from potentially traveling to the lungs. A thrombus clot traveling to the lungs is called a pulmonary embolism (PE). A thrombus in the deep venous system (the part of the circulation that brings blood back to the heart) represents a disorder of normal hemostasis (the normal clotting of blood). Insertion of a vena cava filter is indicated for patients who: GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS

• have a thrombus in a deeply situated vein • experiance complication of anticoagulation therapy such as bleeding • experiance failure of anticoagulation therapy to prevent pulmonary embolism • have an embolus in the lungs (pulmonary embolectomy) removed • have a recurrent embolism while receiving adequate medications

Embolus— An embolus (or emboli the plural form) is a blood clot that has detached from its site of origin and travels to the lungs (pulmonary artery), where it can rupture the artery, causing death. Pulmonary embolism— A traveling thrombus that has lodged in the pulmonary artery. Thrombus— A thrombus (or thrombi the plural form) is a blood clot that can form in a deeply situated vein.

• have significant bleeding complications during anticoagulation

Precautions There no significant precautions concerning insertion of a vena cava filter. The devices are usually effective and short-term complications are unusual

Description Vena cava filters are usually inserted in to prevent PE caused by a thrombosis in a deep vein (DVT). Approximately 60% of patients who die in a hospital have evidence of PE during autopsy. The incidence (number of new cases) of DVT is highest for patients undergoing surgical repair of a fractured hip. However, DVT is common in both surgical and medical patients. DVT is found in 29–33% of patients in medical intensive care units (MICU) and in 27–40% of patients with a heart attack (myocardial infarction). Vena cava filters are placed to prevent thrombi from entering the lungs. There is currently a new type of filter called the KimRay-Greenfield filter.

Preparation Insertion of a vena cava filter is an invasive procedure. The patient is prepared for this procedure using standard surgical protocols. The VCF is commonly implanted in the jugular vein in the neck or the femoral vein in the groin. The procedure is generally well tolerated.

Aftercare This depends on the patient’s health status and recommendation’s for continued care.

there are contraindications for anticoagulation therapy. VCF can increase a patient’s susceptibility for developing recurrent DVT.

Normal results Patient progresses well and prevention of large emboli that can cause a PE is successful.

Abnormal results The desired effect is not accomplished and the patient develops a PE resulting in death. Resources BOOKS

Bone, Roger C. Pulmonary & Critical Care Medicine. MosbyYear Book, Inc., 2000. Braunwald, Eugene, et al, eds. Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 6th ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 2001. Goldman, Lee, et al, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. 21st ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 2000. Rakel, Robert E., et al, eds. Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 4th ed. Mosby-Year Book, Inc., 1998. Rakel, Robert E., et al, eds. Conn’s Current Therapy. 53rd ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 2001. Townsend, Courtney M. Sabiston Textbook of Surgery. 16th ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 2001. PERIODICALS

Isnard, R., and M. Komajda. “Thromboembolism in Heart Failure, Old Ideas and New Challenges.” European Journal of Heart Fail (June 2001). ORGANIZATIONS

Risks Many patients have died from PE even with a vena cava implantation. Use of a VCF is primarily indicated if GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

American College of Angiology. 295 Northern Blvd., Ste. 104 Great Neck, NY 11021-4701.

Laith Farid Gulli, M.D. 3491

Vena cava filter

• cannot receive medications that can dissolve the clot (anticoagulation therapy)

Venography

Venereal diseases see Sexually transmitted diseases

Venography Definition Venography is an x-ray test that provides an image of the leg veins after a contrast dye is injected into a vein in the patient’s foot.

Purpose Venography is primarily performed to diagnose deep vein thrombosis (a condition that can lead to pulmonary embolism). It is the standard procedure used to detect this type of disorder. Venography can also be used to distinguish blood clots from obstructions in the veins, to evaluate congenital vein problems, to see how the deep leg vein valves are working, and to identify a vein for arterial bypass grafting.

Precautions Venography is usually not performed in patients with kidney (renal) problems.

Description Venography (also called phlebography, ascending contrast phlebography, or contrast venography) is an invasive diagnostic test that provides a constant image of leg veins on a fluoroscope screen. Venography identifies the location, extent, and degree of attachment of the blood clots, and enables the condition of the deep leg veins to be assessed. It is especially useful when there is a strong suspicion of deep vein thrombosis, but non-invasive tests have failed to identify the disease. Venography is the most accurate test for detecting deep vein thrombosis. It is nearly 100% sensitive and specific in making this diagnosis (pulmonary embolism is diagnosed in other ways). Accuracy is crucial since deep vein thrombosis can lead to pulmonary embolism, a condition that can be fatal. Venography is not used often, however, because it is painful, expensive, exposes the patient to a fairly high dose of radiation, and can cause complications. In about 5% of cases, there are technical problems in conducting the test. In addition, the test is less accurate in diagnosing problems below the knee. Venography takes between 3045 minutes and can be done in a physician’s office, a laboratory, or a hospital. 3492

A venographic image of a patient’s legs with varicose veins. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

During the procedure, the patient lies on a tilting xray table. The area where the catheter will be inserted will be shaved, if necessary, and cleaned. Sometimes a local anesthetic is injected to numb the skin at the site of the insertion. Sometimes a small incision is required to make a point for insertion. The catheter is inserted and the contrast solution (or dye) is slowly injected. Injection of the dye causes a warm, flushing feeling in the leg that may spread through the body. The contrast solution may also cause slight nausea. About 18% of patients experience discomfort from the contrast solution. In order to fill the deep venous system with dye, a tight band (or tourniquet) may be tied around the ankle of the foot the dye is injected into, or the lower extremities may be tilted. The patient is asked to keep the leg still. The doctor also observes the movement of the solution through the vein with a fluoroscope. At the same time, a series of x rays are taken. When the test is finished, fluid is injected to clear the dye from the veins, the catheter is GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Preparation Fasting or drinking only clear liquids is necessary for four hours before the test. However, sometimes the test done in an emergency even if the patient has eaten. The contrast solution contains iodine, to which some people are allergic. Patients who have allergies or hay fever, or have had a bad reaction to a contrast solution, should tell their doctor. A sedative, such as diazepam (Valium), may be prescribed to help the patient relax.

Aftercare Patients should drink large amounts of fluids to flush the remaining contrast solution from their bodies. The area around the incision will be sore for a few days. If there is swelling, redness, pain, or fever, the doctor should be notified. Pain medication may be needed. In most cases, the patient can resume normal activities the next day.

Risks Venography can also cause complications such as phlebitis, tissue damage, and the formation of deep vein thrombosis in a healthy leg. A rare side effect in up to 8% of cases is a severe allergic reaction to the dye. This usually happens within 30 minutes after injection of the dye and requires medical attention.

Normal results Normal venography results show proper blood flow through the leg veins.

KEY TERMS Contrast solution—A liquid dye injected into the body that allows veins to be seen by x rays. Without the dye, the veins could not be seen on x rays. Deep vein thrombosis—The development or presence of a blood clot in a vein deep within the leg. Deep vein thrombosis can lead to pulmonary embolism. Invasive —A diagnostic test that invades healthy tissue; in the case of venography, through an incision in a healthy vein. Pulmonary embolism —An obstruction of a blood vessel in the lungs, usually due to a blood clot, that blocks a pulmonary artery. Pulmonary embolism can be very serious and in some cases is fatal.

Texas Heart Institute. “Diseases of the Peripheral Arteries and Veins.” In Texas Heart Institute Heart Owner’s Handbook. New York: Wiley & Sons, 1996. “Venography.” In Mayo Clinic Practice of Cardiology. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 1996. “Venous Imaging.” In Diagnostic Nuclear Medicine. 3rd ed. Vol. 1. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1996. PERIODICALS

Barloon T. J., G. R. Bergus, and J. E. Seabold. “Diagnostic Imaging of Lower Limb Deep Venous Thrombosis.” American Family Physician 56 (1 Sept. 1997): 791-801. Tapson, Victor F. “Pulmonary Embolism - New Diagnostic Approaches.” New England Journal of Medicine 336 (15 May 1997). OTHER

Abnormal results Abnormal venography results show well-defined filling defects in veins. Findings include: • blood clots • consistent filling defects

“Venography Helps Patients Avoid Hospital Readmission.” American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons Page. 24 Feb. 1996. 4 Mar. 1998 . “Catching Deep Vein Thrombosis in Time: Diagnostic Tests at a Glance.” SpringNet. 11 Aug. 1997. 4 Mar. 1998 .

• an abrupt end of a test dye column

Lori De Milto

• major deep veins that are unfilled • dye flow that is diverted These results confirm a diagnosis of deep vein thrombosis Resources BOOKS

DeBakey, Michael E., and Antonio M. Gotto Jr. “Invasive Diagnostic Procedures.” In The New Living Heart. Holbrook, MA: Adams Media Corporation, 1997. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Venous access Definition Venous access introduces a needle into a vein, usually for the purpose of withdrawing blood or administering medication. 3493

Venous access

removed, and a bandage is applied over the site of the injection.

Venous access

Purpose Venous access is necessary for fluid administration, medication administration, and obtaining blood for chemical analysis. Sites for access include veins located in the peripheral arms or legs, scalp, neck, and bone. Venous access in children may pose special problems since finding appropriate veins and immobilization may be difficult but essential. For complicated procedures sedation may be indicated. Venous access can be performed during emergency situations, for outpatients, inpatients, and those who require long term chemotherapy.

Precautions There are no major precautions for access during emergency procedures. The main concern during an emergency would be to secure a portal of entry to infuse potentially life saving medications and fluids. For all methods of access the main precautionary measures include attention to accurate procedures. Proper procedures are necessary to minimize the possibility of infection, embolism, phlebitis, or destruction of neighboring tissue.

Description For peripheral venipuncture the common site is usually a vein in the arm (the anticubital fossa located on the opposite side of the elbow) or on the flat bony area of the hand (dorsum of the hand). Scalp veins are accessible in infants under one year of age. The selected vein should be long and straight for needle accommodation. It should be identified by straightness, lack of pulsation (characteristic of an artery), and filling with blood form above (arteries fill from below). Internal jugular catheterization is performed in the neck using special bone and muscle landmarks. The external jugular vein can be cannulized by immobilizing tilted and rotating the head. The subclavian approach is a complicated procedure and emergency access can be performed if attempts for access a vein in other areas have failed. Intraosseous venous access is usually accomplished through a leg bone. Catheters implanted in the front of the chest (anterior chest wall) can accomplish long-term venous access. A large leg vein is preferably used and isolated by dissection. A catheter is inserted into the vein and they are tied together.

Preparation For peripheral vein access in the arm, a tourniquet is applied a few inches over the puncture site. The skin over the puncture site is sterilized with an alcohol pad. The needle is inserted and either blood is drawn and the needle is removed, or a catheter is inserted to place an intra3494

venous line. Scalp veins can be accessible by immobilizing the head, shaving the area from hair, and using a rubber band as a tourniquet. Internal jugular vein catheterization is accomplished by extending the patient’s head over the edge of a table or cart and rotating away from the intended puncture site. Immobilizing the head and extending it 15–20 degrees over the edge of a bed or cart and rotating away from the puncture site can cannalize the external jugular vein. The subclavian vein access is a complicated procedure and requires sedation and special positioning (Trendelenburg). A towel should be place in the back of the area. The skin should be cleansed and the puncture site is anesthetized. For the femoral approach the leg is externally rotated. The artery should be felt and along with specific anatomical landmarks the vein can be localized. The skin should be cleaned and anesthetized. During venous cutdown a large vein near the anklebone is careful dissected away from underlying tissues. The area must be properly cleaned and anaesthetize prior to making an incision. A catheter is inserted and secured in place with sutures.

Aftercare For simple procedures such as peripheral venous access, applying simple pressure (to stop bleeding) and a bandage may be sufficient. For more complicated procedures, the primary cause for access should be treated as well as care to avoid or treat potential complications that may arise from access.

Risks For access into a peripheral vein, care must be taken not to puncture both sides of the vein. After removal of the needle or catheter, a piece of cotton and pressure should be applied over the puncture site to prevent unwanted bleeding. Access with a scalp vein should be preformed with care to avoid hematoma formation (localized blood clot), accidental puncture of an artery, or infection. Access into the internal jugular vein in the neck can cause laceration of an artery or nerve. This procedure can also cause hematoma (blood clot) formation; damage to local nerves within the area, pneumothorax, or misplaced catheterization. Venous access into the external jugular vein can cause hematoma or placement outside the thorax. Subclavian vein access can cause air to enter a vein (resulting in an air embolus) or pneumothorax. Cannulation of the femoral vein in the groin area can cause infection or thrombophlebitis. Intraosseous venous access commonly performed in a leg bone can cause hematomas, infection or damage to bone marrow. This procedure should not be performed if the attempts in one leg is unsuccessful, the skin over the legs is diseased GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Cannula— Insertion of a tube. Catheterization— The process of inserting a tubular instrument into a body cavity to permit passage of fluid. Phlebitis— Inflammation of a vein. Pneumothorax-— The presence of air in the cavity that surrounds the lungs.

(from a burn or infection), or there is a broken leg bone or bone disease. Venous cutdown can cause infection, loss of the catheter in the vein, phlebitis, or nerve damage. Resources BOOKS

Pfenninger, John L., et al, eds. Procedures for Primary Care Physicians. 1st ed. Mosby-Year Book, Inc., 1994. ORGANIZATION

American College of Angiology. 295 Northern Blvd, Ste. 104, Great Neck, NY 11021-4701.

Laith Farid Gulli, M.D. Bilal Nasser, M.Sc.

Venous insufficiency

Causes and symptoms The symptoms of chronic venous insufficiency can be subjective and objective. Subjective symptoms include throbbing, cramping, burning sensations, and leg fatigue. Patients can also develop chronic leg ulcers that may not heal. Varicose veins in the legs can bleed (since veins are delicate structures with thin walls) and cause death. Patients often develop fluid retention (edema) in the affected limb. Skin changes can occur and affected areas can become thin, shiny, discolored (blue-purple), and atrophic. The skin usually becomes thick and tough.

Diagnosis There are several techniques used to diagnose venous disease. Electrical impedance plethysmography (IPG) provides a functional evaluation for outflow obstruction ultrasound (a machine that transmits sound waves) studies can visualize the venous system in certain areas. Another technique called duplex scanning can measure velocity within a vein.

Definition Venous insufficiency is described as abnormal blood flow through veins that can cause local damage, damage to affected legs, or death.

Description Syndromes related to venous insufficiency are caused by valve incompetence. Venous insufficiency is a chronic (long term) condition. The number of new and existing cases is dependent on age and gender. Some patients may have a positive family history. Usually older persons and females are more commonly affected. Deep situated and superficial veins can be affected. Cancer obstructing veins in the pelvis area can cause superficial venous insufficiency. Deep venous insufficiency is commonly caused by thrombophlebitis, causing obstruction of valves that regulate blood flow in veins. Small veins that have been occluded by a thrombosis may re-canalize (opening up GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Treatment Periodic elevation of legs and bed rest can help with leg swelling. Patients are advised to avoid prolonged periods of standing or sitting. Wearing compression stockings can also reduce swelling of the leg. Mild skin infections can be treated with compresses, steroids, and, if infection is present, with antibiotics. Ulceration’s can be treated with compresses, possible surgery, special ointments, and a semi-rigid boot that helps improve blood flow. Varicose veins can be treated with elastic stockings. About 15–20% of patients require surgery, but only after careful evaluation and specialized testing confirms a beneficial value.

Prognosis The prognosis is variable and depends on the progression of disease, extent of damage, and the presence 3495

Venous insufficiency

KEY TERMS

new channels to re-direct blood flow). These re-canalized veins are inadequate and cannot correct the impairment of flow. However, larger veins may still remain occluded. When a thrombosis occurs the valves that regulate venous blood flow become thickened and incompetent, rendering them incapable of regulating back flow of blood. This valvular incompetence will cause an increase in the presence within veins (venous hypertension). Venous hypertension is responsible for most of the symptoms associated with venous disease. Superficial veins can become dilated causing varicose veins (veins that bulge and seem tortuous). Leg ulcers can be severe and are responsible for 100,000 cases of disability in the United States alone.

Ventricular aneurysm

KEY TERMS Atrophic— A wasting of cells and tissues. Thrombophlebitis— Venous inflammation with formation of a thrombus. Thrombus— A clot in the cardiovascular system (the system that circulates blood throughout the body).

of other diseases, which may affect the cardiovascular system.

Prevention Persons who have a strong family history, evidence of disease, and/or those who stand on their legs many hours daily should discuss the option of elastic stocking with their primary clinician. Resources BOOKS

Goroll, Alan H., et al. Primary Care Medicine. 4th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2000. Pfenninger, John L., et al, eds. Procedures for Primary Care Physicians. 1st ed. Mosby-Year Book, Inc., 1994. Rakel, Robert E., et al, eds. Emergency Medicine: Concepts and Clinical Practice. 4th ed. Mosby-Year Book, Inc., 1998. Townsend, Courtney M. Sabiston Textbook of Surgery. 16th ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 2001. ORGANIZATION

American College of Angiology. 295 Northern Blvd., Ste. 104, Great Neck, NY 11021-4701.

Laith Farid Gulli, M.D.

Ventricular aneurysm Definition Ventricular aneurysm is a complication of a heart attack (myocardial infarction). It is a ballooning of a section of a blood vessel in the heart that first appears several days or weeks after an acute myocardial infarction.

Description A myocardial infarction occurs when a section of the heart wall is deprived of blood and dies (undergoes 3496

necrosis, or tissue death, and scarring). The heart wall is mainly muscle. It has two ventricles, the right and left ventricles, which pump blood to and from the lungs, and to the body. When part of the heart muscle dies, pumping power from that part of the wall is lost. After a myocardial infarction, the part of the heart wall that did not die must continue pumping blood and compensate for the dead muscle. Ventricular aneurysm is one of the complications that follow a myocardial infarction. An aneurysm is the outward swelling, or ballooning, of a blood vessel at a weak spot in the wall of the blood vessel. In the case of ventricular aneurysm, the aneurysm occurs in the wall of the heart at the spot where the myocardial infarction occurred. A scar usually forms in the area of the dead muscle tissue, and may eventually calcify. Ventricular aneurysms generally do not rupture. The left ventricle is involved in most cases of ventricular aneurysm.

Causes and symptoms The principle symptom of a ventricular aneurysm is cardiac insufficiency, a condition in which not enough blood is being pumped to the body. Ventricular aneurysm is usually found after a large infarction in the muscle wall of a ventricle. Ventricular aneurysm is seldom seen immediately after a myocardial infarction. It takes several days or weeks to several months to develop. Frequently, recurrent ventricular irregular heartbeats (arrhythmias) and low cardiac output result from the presence of a ventricular aneurysm. Blood clots (thrombi) may form on the inside wall of the aneurysm and produce systemic blood clots that get stuck in a blood vessel (embolisms), which could lead to stroke or an ischemic leg (a usually painful condition in which lack of blood circulation leads to reduced function).

Diagnosis A number of signs may indicate ventricular aneurysm, including an abnormal precordial impulse in the heartbeat, persistent elevation of the S-T segment of an electrocardiogram, and a characteristic bulge seen on the heart when x-rayed. The bulge is typically seen when the heart contracts, driving blood to the aorta, in the systolic phase of the heartbeat. Echolocation (echocardiography or ultrasound) can confirm the presence of an aneurysm. Cardiac catheterization may be performed to determine the extent of the aneurysm and the status of the coronary arteries. Stethoscopic examination reveals abnormal heart sounds, especially those associated with a backflow of blood from the left ventricle to the left atrium in systole or contraction beat (mitral regurgitation). This heart murmur is caused by the heart muscles no longer being able to properly operate the mitral valve. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Arrhythmia—A disturbance in the beating pattern of the heart. Myocardial infarction—Commonly known as a heart attack, a myocardial infarction occurs when a part of the heart muscle is deprived of blood and dies.

Treatment Most cases of ventricular aneurysm are treated by close medical follow-up and limiting patient activity. Surgical removal of the aneurysm is an option when persistent left ventricular failure or arrhythmia occurs, and the aneurysm is large. Vasodilators, diuretics, and digoxin are used to treat heart failure. Anticoagulant drugs are used to prevent the formation of blood clots. Antiarrhythmic drugs are used to treat heart arrhythmias.

Purpose A VAD is a temporary life-sustaining device. VADs can replace the left ventricle (LVAD), the right ventricle (RVAD), or both ventricles (BIVAD). They are used when the heart muscle is damaged and needs to rest in order to heal or when blood flow from the heart is inadequate. VADs can also be used as a bridge in patients awaiting heart transplantation or in patients who have rejected a transplanted heart. Examples of patients who might be candidates for a VAD are those who: • have suffered a massive heart attack • cannot be weaned from heart-lung bypass after treatment with intravenous fluids, medications, and insertion of a balloon pump in the aorta • have an infection in the heart wall that does not respond to conventional treatment • are awaiting a heart transplant and are unresponsive to drug therapy and intravenous fluids

Prognosis Ventricular aneurysm occurs more frequently than is commonly thought. Based on postmortem examination, ventricular aneurysm occurs in as many as 15% of myocardial infarction cases. Patients with a large ventricular aneurysm in the left ventricle have a reduced survival rate. Many patients have mild symptoms which are not life-threatening. The survival rate is dependent on the function of the left ventricle.

• are undergoing high-risk procedures to clear the blockages in a coronary artery Although one in five people suffer left side ventricular failure, only a minority are candidates for VADs. To be considered for a VAD, patients must meet specific criteria concerning blood flow, blood pressure, and general health.

Precautions Poor candidates for a VAD include those with:

Resources BOOKS

• irreversible renal failure

Alexander, R. W., R. C. Schlant, and V. Fuster, eds. The Heart. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998. Gibler, W. B., and T. P. Aufderheide. Emergency Cardiac Care. St. Louis: Mosby, 1994. Giuliani, E. R., et al. Mayo Clinic Practice of Cardiology. 3rd ed. St. Louis: Mosby, 1996.

• severe disease of the vascular system of the brain • cancer that has spread (metastasized) • severe liver disease • blood clotting disorders • severe lung disease

John T. Lohr, PhD

• infections that do not respond to antibiotics • extreme youth or age

Description

Ventricular assist device Definition A ventricular assist device (VAD) is a mechanical pump used for temporary blood circulation support. It GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

There are four types of VADs, each appropriate for a different condition. Surgery to install a VAD is performed under general anesthesia in a hospital operating room. An incision is made in the chest, then catheters are inserted into the heart and the correct artery. The surgeon 3497

Ventricular assist device

decreases the workload of the heart while maintaining adequate flow and blood pressure.

Ventricular ectopic beats

Normal results

KEY TERMS Coronary blood vessels—The arteries and veins that supply blood to the heart muscle.

Because conditions for which VADs are used vary widely and because of the high risks associated with VAD insertion, the outcome of surgery cannot be predicted.

Diaphragm—The muscle that separates the chest cavity from the abdominal cavity.

Resources

Ventricle—The heart has four chambers. The right and left ventricles are at the bottom of the heart and act as the body’s main pumps.

“Ventricular Assist Device.” In The Patient’s Guide to Medical Tests, ed. Barry L. Zaret, et al. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1997.

BOOKS

OTHER

sutures the catheters in place, then attaches tubing to connect the catheters to the pump. The pump stays outside the body. Once it is turned on, blood flows out of the diseased ventricle and into the pump, then is returned to the correct blood vessel leaving the heart.

Preparation Before the operation the patient meets with an anesthesiologist to determine any special conditions that will affect the administration of anesthesia. Standard preoperative blood and urine studies are performed, and the heart is monitored both before and during the operation with an electrocardiograph.

“Ventricular Assist Devices.” Department of Biological and Agricultural Engineering. New York State University .

Tish Davidson

Ventricular ectopic beats Definition A ventricular ectopic beat (VEB) is an extra heartbeat originating in the lower chamber of the heart. This beat, also called a premature ventricular contraction (PVC), occurs before the beat triggered by the heart’s normal function.

Aftercare The patient is monitored in intensive care, with follow-up blood, urine, and neurological studies. Blood thinning medications are given to prevent blood clotting. Except for those patients awaiting a heart transplant, patients are slowly and gradually weaned from the VAD. Even when patients no longer need the VAD, they will require supportive drug therapy and/or a balloon pump inserted in the aorta.

Risks VAD insertion carries risks of severe complications. Bleeding from surgery is common and occurs in as many as 30-50% of patients. Other complications include the development of blood clots, partial paralysis of the diaphragm, respiratory failure, kidney failure, failure of the VAD, damage to the coronary blood vessels, stroke, and infection. Sometimes when the left ventricle is supported, the right ventricle begins to need assistance. If VADs are inserted in both ventricles, the heart may become so dependent on their support that they cannot be removed. 3498

Description Ventricular ectopic beats are common and do not indicate a problem in people without heart disease. However, if a person has aortic stenosis, heart failure, or a previous heart attack, VEBs may be followed by ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation, which can lead to sudden death.

Causes and symptoms Although the origin of a VEB is well documented, the exact cause or causes are not well understood. Some physicians believe the beat is caused by a trigger of specific origin, while other physicians believe the beat is random. Occasional ventricular ectopic beats occur in healthy people. If there is no evidence of heart disease, there is little or no danger to the individual. A single ventricular ectopic beat has very little effect on the pumping ability of the heart and usually does not cause any symptoms. If a symptom is felt, it is the feeling of a strong or skipped beat, often described as a thump, kick, or flip-flop. Sometimes, the sensation is referred to as a fullness in the neck. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Angioplasty—A surgical procedure which dilates a narrowed or blocked part of an artery.

Prevention

Aortic stenosis—A stiffening of the artery which carries blood from the heart to the body.

Occasional ventricular ectopic beats in healthy people do not need to be prevented. People with a history of heart disease can usually control VEBs with medication.

Beta-blockers—A class of medication used to block the cellular response to chemicals normally present in the body.

Resources

Coronary artery—The vessel which brings blood to the muscle of the heart. Fibrillation—Rapid, uncoordinated quivering of the heart. Heart failure—A term used when the heart is unable to pump enough blood to supply the needs of the body.

BOOKS

McGoon, Michael D., ed. Mayo Clinic Heart Book: The Ultimate Guide to Heart Health. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc., 1993. ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. .

Dorothy Elinor Stonely

Ventricular failure see Heart failure Diagnosis Ventricular ectopic beats are easily seen on an electrocardiogram.

Treatment If a person is otherwise healthy, the only treatment needed is to decrease stress and limit the use of alcohol and caffeine. Cold medicines, available without prescription, sometimes contain drugs (e.g., decongestants) that stimulate the heart and should be used with caution. If symptoms are uncomfortable, or the pattern of VEBs indicates a problem, the physician may prescribe drug therapy. Beta-blockers are quite safe and are usually tried first. A person who has a history of heart attack or heart disease, and is experiencing frequent or complex VEBs, is at greater risk of sudden death. Drug therapy with beta-blockers will be recommended. In addition, angioplasty or coronary artery bypass surgery may relieve any underlying coronary artery blockage and reduce the danger of sudden death. Treatment with antiarrhythmic drugs can suppress VEBs, but they can also increase the risk of a fatal abnormal rhythm. Often, extensive electrophysiologic testing and risk evaluation will be done before this method of treatment is prescribed.

Prognosis In healthy people, VEBs are inconsequential. If the person with heart disease is able to find an effective GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Ventricular fibrillation Definition Ventricular fibrillation is a very rapid, uncoordinated, ineffective series of contractions throughout the lower chambers of the heart. Unless stopped, these chaotic impulses are fatal.

Description When the ventricles begin to quiver, and do not employ coordinated contractions, the heart is said to be fibrillating. In this condition the ventricles cannot pump blood from the heart. Ventricular fibrillation (V-fib) is the worst kind of abnormal heart rhythm, and is a form of cardiac arrest. It involves the pumping of the lower chambers of the heart, while atrial fibrillation involves the upper chambers.

Causes and symptoms Ventricular fibrillation is often associated with acute ischemic events (ischemia involves the deprivation of oxygenated blood to an area of tissue), and with chronic ischemic heart disease. It is frequently seen immediately following a heart attack. It may also develop during hypoxia, atrial fibrillation, or improper grounding of electrical devices. An extremely low level of potassium in the blood can also cause ventricular fibrillation. 3499

Ventricular fibrillation

KEY TERMS

means of controlling ventricular ectopic beats, the outlook is good.

Ventricular septal defect

KEY TERMS Atrial fibrillation—A condition in which the upper chambers of the heart quiver instead of contracting effectively Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)—Using rescue breathing and chest compressions to help a person whose breathing and heartbeat have stopped Cardioversion—A electrical shock delivered to the heart to restore a normal rhythm Electrocardiogram—A visual representation of the heart beat

If ventricular fibrillation occurs in the hospital in conjunction with a heart attack, defibrillation has a 95% success rate. If shock and heart failure are present at the time, even with immediate defibrillation, only about 30% of those stricken are successfully restore to a normal heart rate.

Prevention A healthy lifestyle to reduce the risk of heart diseases which lead to ventricular fibrillation is the best prevention. For people who have experienced an episode of V-fib, an internal cardioverter-defibrillator may prevent further episodes.

Heart failure—A term used when the heart is unable to pump enough blood to supply the needs of the body

Resources

Hypoxia—Insufficient oxygen in the cells of the body

McGoon, Michael D., ed. Mayo Clinic Heart Book: The Ultimate Guide to Heart Health. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc., 1993.

Ischemic—Insufficient blood reaching the tissues

BOOKS

ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. .

The first, and usually the only, symptom of V-fib is sudden unconsciousness.

Dorothy Elinor Stonely

Diagnosis When an individual suddenly collapses, the possibility of ventricular fibrillation should be considered immediately. A quick assessment usually shows no pulse or heartbeat. The diagnosis of ventricular fibrillation is confirmed with an electrocardiogram.

Treatment Basic life support with standard cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) must be started within a few minutes, followed as soon as possible with cardioversion. Cardioversion is an electric shock delivered to the heart to stop the fibrillating. Early defibrillation is the key to survival. If left untreated, irreversible brain damage, due to lack of oxygen to the brain, occurs after about five minutes. After the heart resumes its normal rhythm, medications are given to help maintain the rhythm.

Prognosis Early and effective CPR may provide the time necessary for medical personnel to arrive with a defibrillator. If a defibrillator is able to promptly restore a normal rhythm, up to 25% of victims are able to leave the hospital without evidence of brain damage. 3500

Ventricular septal defect Definition A ventricular septal defect is a hole in the wall of the heart (septum) that separates the left lower chamber (left ventricle) from the right lower chamber (right ventricle). The hole allows blood to flow from the left ventricle to the right ventricle instead of entering the aorta for distribution throughout the body. Ventricular septal defect is one of a group of heart problems found in newborn babies that are collectively called congenital heart disease.

Description The heart has four chambers. The two lower chambers are called ventricles and are responsible for pumping blood. The right ventricle pumps blood to the lungs and the left ventricle pumps blood throughout the body. If there is a hole in the septum that separates the two ventricles, blood from the left ventricle can enter the right ventricle. This blood recycles through the lungs before returning to the left ventricle. This results in less oxygenated blood reaching the body. If the hole is sufficiently large, the lack of oxygen being delivered to the body GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Echocardiogram—An image of the heart produced by an instrument that uses sound waves to create image the heart. Electrocardiogram—A graph of the heart’s beating action. Endocarditis—An inflammation of the interior lining of the heart that is frequently caused by infectious agents.

body. Children with ventricular septal defect tend to suffer more frequent colds and pneumonia, and have a higher rate of inflammation and infection of the heart (endocarditis). An angiogram of a ventricular septal defect. This is a hole in the ventricular septum causing blood to flow from the left ventricle (right of image) to the right ventricle and to the lungs. The bent catheter at the center, which is used to take the angiogram, passes through the hole between the ventricles. (Photograph by Simon Fraser, Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

can cause severe problems, including heart failure and breathlessness. Approximately 0.7% of all babies have a congenital heart defect. Of these, 20% have a ventricular septal defect.

Causes and symptoms Congenital heart defects are errors in the development of the heart structure. They occur early in the life of the embryo. There is no known cause of congenital heart defects. They can be associated with several diseases, such as German measles (rubella) and Down syndrome. Genetics does not seem to play a role in ventricular septal defect. People with a heart defect do not have an increased chance of passing it on to their children. Symptoms result from a reduced amount of oxygen going to the body. Symptoms are proportional to the size of the defect. They may appear at any time in the life of the child. In cases where the hole in the septum is very small, few or no symptoms may appear and the child may develop normally. In cases where the ventricular septal defect is large, the newborn will shows signs of heavy breathing, sweating, and feeding difficulties. Children with this defect tire easily. Ventricular septal defect can also result in stunted growth resulting from insufficient oxygen being delivered to the growing GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Diagnosis The condition is first suspected based on observation of the child. The physician will listen to the heart with a stethoscope (auscultation) to detect a heart murmur. X rays, electrocardiogram (ECG), and echocardiography can all be used to evaluate ventricular septal defect.

Treatment Most small holes close without treatment. Often, as the child grows, the hole closes or becomes smaller. If the hole is large or fails to close, the child is usually treated with drugs. Holes that persist and are causing problems in development are corrected by open heart surgery. Usually, surgery is performed after one year of age, but before the child enters school. This allows time for a trial of drug therapy, which could potentially eliminate the need for surgery. The operation is generally safe.

Prognosis Children with small septal defects tend to develop normally and without any effect on their ability to participate in physical activities. Surgery allows children with larger defects to live nearly normal lives. Resources BOOKS

Alexander, R. W., R. C. Schlant, and V. Fuster, eds. The Heart. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998. Berkow, Robert, ed. Merck Manual of Medical Information. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. 3501

Ventricular septal defect

KEY TERMS

Ventricular shunt

OTHER

KEY TERMS

“Ventricular Septal Defect.” The Merck Page. 13 Apr. 1998 .

John T. Lohr, PhD

Ventricular shunt Definition Ventricular shunt is a surgical procedure in which a tube is placed in one of the fluid-filled chambers inside the brain (ventricles). The fluid around the brain and the spinal column is called the cerebrospinal fluid. When infection or disease causes an excess of this cerebrospinal fluid in the ventricles, the shunt is placed to drain it and thereby relieve excess pressure.

Purpose Ventricular shunt relieves hydrocephalus, a condition in which the ventricles are enlarged. In hydrocephalus, pressure from the cerebrospinal fluid usually increases. It may be caused by tumor of the brain or of the membranes covering the brain (meninges), infection of or bleeding into the cerebrospinal fluid, or inborn malformations of the brain. Symptoms of hydrocephalus may include headache, personality disturbances and loss of intellectual abilities (dementia), problems in walking, irritability, vomiting, abnormal eye movements, or a low level of consciousness. Normal pressure hydrocephalus is associated with progressive dementia, problems in walking, and loss of bladder control (urinary incontinence). Even though the cerebrospinal fluid is not thought to be under increased pressure in this condition, it may also be treated by ventricular shunting.

Precautions As with any surgical procedure, the surgeon must know about any medications or health problems that may increase the patient’s risk. Because infections are both common and serious complications, antibiotics are often given before and after surgery.

Description The ventricular shunt tube is placed to drain fluid from the ventricular system in the brain to the cavity of the abdomen or to the large vein in the neck (jugular vein). Therefore, surgical procedures must be done both 3502

Cerebrospinal fluid—Fluid bathing the brain and spinal cord. Computed tomography (CT) scan—An imaging technique in which cross-sectional x rays of the body are compiled to create a three-dimensional image of the body’s internal structures. Dementia—Progressive loss of mental abilities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—An imaging technique that uses a large circular magnet and radio waves to generate signals from atoms in the body. These signals are used to construct images of internal structures.

in the brain and at the drainage site. The tubing contains valves to insure that fluid can only flow out of the brain and not back into it. The valve can be set at a desired pressure to allow cerebrospinal fluid to escape whenever the pressure level is exceeded. A small reservoir may be attached to the tubing and placed under the scalp. This reservoir allows samples of cerebrospinal fluid to be removed with a syringe to check the pressure. Fluid from the reservoir can also be examined for bacteria, cancer cells, blood, or protein, depending on the cause of hydrocephalus. The reservoir may also be used to inject antibiotics for cerebrospinal fluid infection or chemotherapy medication for meningeal tumors.

Preparation The diagnosis of hydrocephalus should be confirmed by diagnostic techniques that make images of the brain, such as computed tomography scan (CT scan) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), before the shunting procedure is performed. These techniques will also show any associated brain abnormalities. Cerebrospinal fluid should be examined if infection or tumor of the meninges is suspected. Patients with dementia or mental retardation should undergo neuropsychological testing to establish a baseline psychological profile before the shunting procedure. Patients with normal pressure hydrocephalus may experience a temporary improvement in walking and mental abilities upon removal of a moderate amount of cerebrospinal fluid. This improvement may be an indication that shunting will improve their condition. However, patients who do not improve after temporary cerebrospinal fluid drainage may still benefit from ventricular shunt. When a case is in doubt, continuous monitorGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Aftercare To avoid infections at the shunt site, the area should be kept clean. Cerebrospinal fluid should be checked periodically by the doctor to be sure there is no infection or bleeding into the shunt. Cerebrospinal fluid pressure should be checked to be sure the shunt is operating properly. The eyes should be examined regularly because shunt failure may damage the nerve to the eyes (optic nerve). If not treated promptly, damage to the optic nerve causes irreversible loss of vision. Patients or caregivers should understand the life-threatening nature of shunt problems. All symptoms and signs of potential shunt failure or infection must be taken seriously.

PERIODICALS

McLone, D. G., and K. E. Aronyk. “An Approach to the Management of Arrested and Compensated Hydrocephalus. (Review).” Pediatric Neurosurgery 19, no. 2 (1993): 101-103. Raftopoulos, C., et al. “Prospective Analysis by Computed Tomography and Long-Term Outcome of 23 Adult Patients with Chronic Idiopathic Hydrocephalus.” Neurosurgery 38 (1996): 51-59. Vanneste, J., et al. “Shunting Normal-Pressure Hydrocephalus: Do the Benefits Outweigh the Risk? A Multicenter Study and Literature Review.” Neurology 42 (1992): 54-59. ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Neurology. 1080 Montreal Ave., St. Paul, MN 55116. (612) 695-1940. .

Laurie Barclay, MD

Risks Complications of shunting occur in 30% of cases, but only 5% are serious. Serious and long-term complications are bleeding under the outermost covering of the brain (subdural hematoma), infection, stroke, and shunt failure. Infection at the shunt site may cause a loss of intelligence. When shunts drain to the abdomen (ventriculoperitoneal shunts), fluid may accumulate in the abdomen or abdominal organs may be injured. If cerebrospinal fluid pressure is lowered too much, patients may have severe headaches, often with nausea and vomiting, whenever they sit up or stand.

Normal results Of patients with normal pressure hydrocephalus who are treated with shunting, 25-80% experience long-term improvement. Normal pressure hydrocephalus is more likely to improve when it is caused by infection of or bleeding into the cerebrospinal fluid than when it occurs without an underlying cause. Walking difficulties and bladder control are more likely to improve than dementia is. After shunting, the ventricles get smaller within three or four days. This shrinkage occurs even when hydrocephalus has been present for a year or more. Clinically detectable signs of improvement occur within a few weeks. The cause of hydrocephalus, duration of hydrocephalus before shunting, and associated brain abnormalities affect the outcome. Resources BOOKS

Black, P. M. “The Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus Syndrome.” In Concepts in Neurosurgery: Hydrocephalus, ed. R. M. Scott. Baltimore: William & Wilkins, 1990. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Ventricular tachycardia Definition Ventricular tachycardia (V-tach) is a rapid heart beat that originates in one of the lower chambers (the ventricles) of the heart. To be classified as tachycardia, the heart rate is usually at least 100 beats per minute.

Description A rapid heart rate can originate in either the left or right ventricle. Ventricular tachycardia which lasts more than 30 seconds is referred to as sustained ventricular tachycardia. A period of three to five rapid beats is called a salvo, and six beats or more lasting less than 30 seconds is called nonsustained ventricular tachycardia. Rapid ventricular rhythms are more serious than rapid atrial rhythms because they make the heart extremely inefficient. They also tend to cause more severe symptoms, and have a much greater tendency to result in death. Although generally considered to be among the lifethreatening abnormal rhythms, harmless forms of sustained V-tach do exist. These occur in people without any structural heart disease.

Causes and symptoms Most ventricular tachycardias are associated with serious heart disease such as coronary artery blockage, cardiomyopathy, or valvular heart disease. V-tach is often triggered by an extra beat originating in either the right or left ventricle. It also occurs frequently in connection with a heart attack. V-tach commonly occurs within 24 hours of the start of the attack. It must be treated 3503

Ventricular tachycardia

ing of cerebrospinal fluid pressure (which in itself requires a surgical procedure) may indicate whether shunting is likely to be helpful.

Vesicoureteral reflux

KEY TERMS Atrial—Having to do with the upper chambers of the heart. Cardiomyopathy—A disease of the heart muscle. Cardioversion—A electrical shock delivered to the heart to restore a normal rhythm. Coronary artery—The artery that supplies blood to the heart muscle itself. Electrocardiogram—A visual representation of the heart beat. Fibrillation—Rapid, uncoordinated, quivering of the heart. Palpitations—Uncomfortable feeling of the heart beat in the chest. Valvular—Having to do with the valves inside the heart.

quickly to prevent fibrillation. After 48 to 72 hours of the heart attack, the risk of ventricular tachycardia is small. However, people who have suffered severe damage to the larger anterior wall of the heart have a second danger period, because V-tach often occurs during convalescence from this type of heart attack. Sustained ventricular tachycardia prevents the ventricles from filling adequately so the heart can not pump normally. This results in loss of blood pressure, and can lead to a loss of consciousness and to heart failure. The individual with V-tach almost always experiences palpitation, though some episodes cause no symptoms at all.

An electrocardiographic image indicating a rapid heart beat. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

Prevention A person susceptible to sustained ventricular tachycardia often has a small abnormal area in the ventricles that is the source of the trigger event. This area can sometimes be surgically removed. If surgery is not an option, and drug therapy is not effective, a device called an automatic cardioverter-defibrillator may be implanted. Resources BOOKS

McGoon, Michael D., ed. Mayo Clinic Heart Book: The Ultimate Guide to Heart Health. New York: William Morrow and Co., Inc., 1993. ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. .

Dorothy Elinor Stonely

Diagnosis Diagnosis is easily made with an electrocardiogram.

Treatment Any episode of ventricular tachycardia that causes symptoms needs to be treated. An episode that lasts more than 30 seconds, even without symptoms, also needs to be treated. Drug therapy can be given intravenously to suppress episodes of V-tach. If blood pressure falls below normal, a person will need electric cardioversion (“shock”) immediately.

Verrucae see Warts Vertigo see Dizziness Vesicle see Skin lesions

Vesicoureteral reflux Definition

Prognosis With appropriate drug or surgical treatment, ventricular tachycardia can be controlled in most people. 3504

Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) refers to a condition in which urine flows from the bladder, back up the ureter, and back into the kidneys. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The normal flow of urine begins in the collecting system of each kidney. Urine then flows out of each kidney and into a tube called the ureter. Each ureter leads into the bladder, where the urine collects until it is passed out of the body. Normally, urine should flow only in this direction. In vesicoureteral reflux, however, urine that has already collected in the bladder is able to flow backwards from the bladder, up the ureter, and back into the collecting system of the kidney. VUR may be present in either one or both ureters. Vesicoureteral reflux causes damage to the kidneys in two ways: • The kidney is not designed to withstand very much pressure. When VUR is present, backpressure of the urine on the kidney is significant. This can damage the kidney. • The kidney is usually sterile, meaning that no bacteria are normally present within it. In VUR, bacteria that enter through the urinary tract may be carried back up the ureter with the urine. These bacteria can enter the kidney, causing severe infection.

Causes and symptoms Most cases of VUR are due to a defect in the way the ureter is implanted into the bladder. The angle may be wrong, or the valve (which should allow urine only oneway entrance into the bladder) may be weak. Structural defects of the urinary system may also cause VUR. These include a situation in which two ureters leave a kidney, instead of the usual one (duplicated ureters), and in which the ureter is greatly enlarged at the end leading into the bladder (ureterocele). VUR alone does not usually cause symptoms. Symptoms develop when an infection has set in. The usual symptoms of infection include frequent need to urinate, pain or burning with urination, and blood or pus in the urine. Occasionally, VUR is suspected when a child has a difficult time becoming toilet trained. In these cases, the bladder may become irritable and spasm, because it is never totally empty of urine. When the kidneys have been damaged, high blood pressure may develop.

Diagnosis VUR is diagnosed by taking a series of x-ray pictures. These are taken after putting a small tube (catheter) into the bladder. The bladder is then filled with a dye solution which lights up on the x-ray picture. Pictures are taken immediately, followed by x rays taken while the patient is urinating. This will allow reflux to be demonstrated, and will reveal whether the level of reflux increasGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

es when pressure increases during urination. Reflux is then graded based on the height and effects of the VUR: • Grade I. VUR enters just the portion of the ureter closest to the bladder. The ureter appears normal in size. • Grade II. VUR enters the entire ureter, and goes up into the collecting system of the kidney. The ureter and the collecting system appear normal in size and structure. • Grade III. VUR enters the entire ureter and kidney collecting system. Either the ureter or the collecting system are abnormal in size or shape. • Grade IV. Similar to Grade III, but the ureter is greatly enlarged. • Grade V. Similar to Grade IV, but the ureter is also abnormally twisted/curved, and the collecting system is greatly enlarged, with absence of the usual structural details.

Treatment Treatment depends on the grade that is diagnosed. In grades I and II, the usual treatment involves long-term use of a small daily dose of antibiotics to prevent the development of infections. The urine is tested regularly to make sure that no infection occurs. The kidneys are evaluated regularly to make sure that they are growing normally and that no new scarring has occurred. Grade III VUR can be treated with antibiotics and careful monitoring. New infections, scarring, or stunting of kidney growth may result in a need for surgery. Grades IV and V are extremely likely to require surgery. Surgery for VUR consists of reimplanting the ureters into the bladder at a more normal angle. This usually improves the functioning of the valve leading into the bladder. When structural defects of the urinary system are present, surgery will almost always be required to repair these defects.

Prognosis Prognosis is dependent on the grade of VUR. About 80% of children with grades I and II VUR simply grow out of the problem. As they grow, the ureter lengthens, changing its angle of entry into the bladder. About 50% of children with grade III VUR will require surgery. Nearly all children with grades IV and V VUR will require surgery. In these cases, it is usually best to perform surgery at a relatively young age, in order to avoid damage and scarring to the kidneys.

Prevention While there is no known method of preventing VUR, it is important to note that a high number of the siblings of 3505

Vesicoureteral reflux

Description

Vibriosis

KEY TERMS Bladder—The muscular sac which receives urine from the kidneys, stores it, and ultimately works to remove it from the body during urination. Reflux—A condition in which flow is backwards from normal. Ureter—A muscular tube leading from the kidney to the bladder, down which the urine flows.

children with VUR will also have VUR. Many of these siblings (about 36%) will have no symptoms, but will be discovered through routine examinations prompted by their brother’s or sister’s problems. It is important to identify these children, so that antibiotic treatment can be used to prevent the development of infection and kidney damage. Resources BOOKS

Francoeur, D., et al. “Urologic Problems.” In Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology, ed. J. S. Sanfilippo, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1994. Gonzalez, Richard. “Vesicoureteral Reflux.” In Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, ed. Richard E. Behrman. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. PERIODICALS

Connolly, L. P., et al “Vesicoureteral Reflux in Children: Incidence and Severity in Siblings.” Journal of Urology 157, no. 6 (June 1997): 2287+. Greenfield, S. P., et al. “Experience with Vesicoureteral Reflux in Children: Clinical Characteristics.” Journal of Urology 158, no. 2 (Aug. 1997): 574+. Manzoni, G., and E. Merlini. “Vesico-Ureteral Reflux in 1996.” Paediatric Urology 6, no. 6 (Nov. 1996): 301+. ORGANIZATIONS

American Foundation for Urologic Disease. 300 West Pratt St., Suite 401, Baltimore, MD 21201. (800) 242-2383. National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Information Clearinghouse (NKUDIC). 3 Information Way, Bethesda, MD 20892-3580. (800) 891-5388. .

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Vestibulitis see Labyrinthitis Viagra see Sildenafil citrate Vibrio cholera infection see Cholera Vibrio parahemolyticus infection see Vibriosis 3506

Vibriosis Definition Vibriosis is a disease caused by an infection with bacteria of the Vibrio genus, most commonly Vibrio parahemolyticus or Vibrio vulnificus. Vibrio bacteria cause diarrhea, skin infections, and/or blood infections. The diarrhea-causing Vibrio parahemolyticus is a relatively harmless infection, but Vibrio vulnificus infection, though rare, can lead to blood poisoning and death in many cases.

Description Vibriosis is a general term referring to an infection by any member of the large group of Vibrio bacteria. The bacteria that causes cholera is in this group. Alternate names include non-cholera Vibrio infection, Vibrio parahemolyticus infection, and Vibrio vulnificus infection. Vibrio parahemolyticus and Vibrio vulnificus are found in salt water. Infection with either of these two bacteria primarily occurs through eating contaminated raw seafood. Raw oysters are the usual source, although other seafood can carry the bacteria. Vibrio parahemolyticus causes severe diarrhea. Vibrio vulnificus may cause diarrhea, but in persons with an underlying disease it may cause severe blood infections (septicemia or blood poisoning). Contact of a wound with seawater or contaminated seafood can lead to a Vibrio vulnificus skin infection. Vibriosis is not very common in the United States. Most cases occur in coastal states between June and October. Between 1988 and 1991, there were only 21 reported cases of Vibrio parahemolyticus infection in the United States. Between 1988 and 1995, there were over 300 reports of Vibrio vulnificus infection in the United States.

Causes and symptoms Vibriosis is caused by eating seafood contaminated with Vibrio parahemolyticus or Vibrio vulnificus. These bacteria damage the inner wall of the intestine, which causes diarrhea and related symptoms. Vibrio vulnificus can get through the intestinal wall and into the bloodstream. Persons at risk for severe, often fatal vibriosis include those with liver disease (cirrhosis), excess iron (hemochromatosis), thalassemia (a blood disorder), AIDS, diabetes, or those who are immunosuppressed. Symptoms of intestinal infection occur within two days of eating contaminated seafood. Symptoms last for GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Diagnosis Vibriosis can be diagnosed and treated by an infectious disease specialist. It is diagnosed when Vibrio bacteria are grown from samples of stool, blood, or blister fluid. The symptoms and a recent history of eating raw seafood are very important clues for diagnosis.

Treatment To counteract the fluid loss resulting from diarrhea, the patient will receive fluids either by mouth or intravenously. Antibiotics are not helpful in treating Vibrio parahemolyticus diarrhea. However, Vibrio vulnificus infections are treated with antibiotics such as tetracycline (Sumycin, Achromycin V), or doxycycline (Monodox) plus ceftazidime (Ceftaz, Fortraz, Tazicef). One out of five patients with vibriosis requires hospitalization.

Prognosis Most healthy persons completely recover from diarrhea caused by Vibrio bacteria. Vibrio vulnificus blood infection affects persons with underlying illness and is fatal in half of those cases. Vibrio vulnificus wound infections are fatal in one quarter of the cases.

Prevention Contamination with Vibrio bacteria does not change the look, smell, or taste of the seafood. Vibriosis can be prevented by avoiding raw or undercooked shellfish, keeping raw shellfish and its juices away from cooked foods, and avoiding contact of wounded skin with seawater or raw seafood. Resources BOOKS

Sack, David A. “Cholera and Related Illnesses Caused by Vibrio Species and Aeromonas.” In Infectious Diseases, ed. Sherwood L. Gorbach, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1998. PERIODICALS

Kumamoto, Kenneth S., and David J. Vukich. “Clinical Infections of Vibrio vulnificus: A Case Report and Review of GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

the Literature.” The Journal of Emergency Medicine 16, no. 1 (1998): 61-66. OTHER

Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. .

Belinda Rowland, PhD

Viral diarrhea see Rotavirus infections Viral meningitis see Meningitis Visceral l see Roundworm infections

Vision training Definition Vision training, also known as vision therapy or orthoptics, consists of a variety of programs to enhance visual performance. It includes treatments for focusing, binocularity, and eye movement problems. Vision training is generally provided by an optometrist (O.D.).

Purpose While visual acuity refers to how clearly each eye can see, vision training addresses how well the two eyes work together as a team. When looking at an object, the eyes must focus on the object (e.g., focusing for near or far objects). This involves the lens system of the eyes. The eyes must also work as a team and point at the same object so that the person does not see double. Aiming precisely at the same object will aid in depth perception (stereopsis) and seeing objects in three-dimensions (3D). Although crossed eyes (strabismus) is an obvious condition, many defects in the coordination of eye movement are far less apparent. Even so, they can cause problems in reading, driving vehicles, and other complex tasks that require the integrated function of eyes and body. It is the goal of vision therapy to improve these subtle interactions using carefully devised exercises and devices. The discipline, called “behavioral optometry,” involves a careful evaluation of visual function, concentrating on complex skills such as rapid reading, distance perception, peripheral field awareness, accommodative facility, and the coordinated movement of each eye in relationship to the other. From that assessment the doctor goes on to design a course of exercises to correct the problems discovered. Like any other type of training, success requires practice and persistence until habits and reflexes can be retrained. 3507

Vision training

two to 10 days and include watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, headache, and possibly fever. Symptoms of a blood infection develop one to two days after eating contaminated seafood, and include fever, chills, low blood pressure, and large fluid-filled blisters on the arms or legs. Similar blisters can also be produced by a Vibrio vulnificus skin infection.

Vision training

There are a number of different techniques and instruments used in vision therapy; the field is evolving rapidly in many directions. Some computerized exercises are being developed that promise better patient motivation. A device called the Dynavision apparatus, has produced positive results in retraining stroke victims to operate motor vehicles. And traditional forms of vision therapy have increased reading efficiency in an older age group (62 to 75 years). Because the goal of vision training is to improve visual efficiency and visual processing, people having problems reading should consider a vision training evaluation. Children rubbing their eyes while reading, avoiding reading, or getting headaches while reading should be evaluated. Problems with sustaining focusing (accommodative insufficiency) or problems keeping words single (convergence or divergence problems) may be present. A full eye-health evaluation and vision training workup may reveal a problem. Vision training is also appropriate for people learning how to coordinate the eyes after surgery for strabismus. Vision training can also be used in lazy eye (amblyopia) and includes patching the eye and doing various exercises. Dyslexia is a problem with following the flow of words when reading. Often the order of letters or words is reversed. It is a complex problem involving the way the brain processes the stream of information coming in from the eyes. While vision therapy is not a treatment for dyslexia or learning disabilities, there may be an underlying visual processing problem that may be present. Vision therapy can be part of a multidisciplinary approach to treating learning disabilities. Sports vision deals with visual performance in sportrelated activities. Protective eyewear is also a large consideration when participating in sports. Basketball, baseball, racquetball, and swimming (and other sports as well) can all cause injury to the eyes. Batting helmets with face shields, protective goggles with polycarbonate lenses, or something as simple as ultraviolet (UV) coatings on glasses to protect the eyes from the sun in outdoor sports such as golf can protect the eyes. Hitting a baseball or throwing a basketball into a hoop requires accurate fixation. Golfers need to see clearly and judge distance. Bifocals may need to be adjusted to allow for putting, driving, and reading the score card. While many of these issues (e.g., UV coatings) can be addressed at a regular eye exam, sports vision may be able to help with more specific, individual problems.

Precautions Behavioral optometry is a relatively new field of study. Results are mixed. Newer techniques, more refined 3508

evaluation methods, and newer pieces of apparatus are continuously being appraised. More study results are needed to define the scope and benefits of this discipline.

Description Vision therapy is individually tailored to the subject and the discovered problems. It can be a lengthy process with many variations that requires repetition until eye muscles, coordination, reflexes, habits, and the way the brain handles visual input are all retrained. Each program will be individualized. The patient should be aware of the time involved for treatment. Treatment can be from several weeks to several months depending upon the condition. Some insurance plans may cover vision training.

Preparation If vision therapy is recommended, the optometrist will discuss thoroughly what is expected and necessary for success. The patient must be prepared to perform some eye exercises at home.

Aftercare Even after the treatment is successful, it may be necessary to continue the exercises to maintain the benefits. It may be necessary to repeat treatment in the future.

Risks No risk is involved. The treatment is safe.

Normal results A carefully and individually tailored program of vision therapy should result in a gradual improvement in whatever complex visual function is being addressed. This progress ought to be measurable by using the same tests that were used to diagnose it. If the patient had symptoms, such as headaches or double vision while reading, it should be alleviated.

Abnormal results Because the treatment is safe, the only abnormal result is failure. At the start of treatment, the optometrist should provide a reasonable estimate of what improvement to expect and how long it will take. Should this prove incorrect, either the treatment needs to be modified or the problem deemed untreatable by that method. Resources PERIODICALS

Birnbaum, M. H. “Behavioral Optometry: A Historical Perspective.” Journal of the American Optometric Association 65, no. 4 (Apr. 1994): 255-64. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Visual evoked potential study see Evoked potential studies

Accommodation—The focusing of the lens of the eye. Binocular—Both eyes accurately pointing to the same object. Stereopsis—The visual perception of depth, or the ability to see three-dimensionally. For this to occur, the person must be binocular.

Gallaway, M., and M. Schieman. “The Efficacy of Vision Therapy for Convergence Excess.” Journal of the American Optometric Association 68, no. 2 (Feb. 1997): 81-6. Garriott, R. S., C. L. Heyman, and M. W. Rouse. “Role of Optometric Vision Therapy for Surgically Treated Strabismus Patients.” Optometry & Vision Science 74, no. 4 (Apr. 1997): 179-84. Groffman, S. “Motivational Factors in Vision Therapy: Comparison of Computerized vs. Manipulative Techniques.” Journal of the American Optometric Association 67, no. 6 (June 1996): 344-9. Klavora, P., et al. “The Effects of Dynavision Rehabilitation on Behind-the-Wheel Driving Ability and Selected Psychomotor Abilities of Persons After Stroke.” American Journal of Occupational Therapy 49, no.6 (June 1995): 534-542. Klavora, P., and M. Warren. “Rehabilitation of Visuomotor Skills in Poststroke Patients Using the Dynavision Apparatus.” Perceptual and Motor Skills 86, no. 1 (Feb. 1998): 23-30. Kulp, M. T., and P. P. Schmidt. “Effect of Oculomotor and Other Visual Skills on Reading Performance: A Literature Review.” Optometry & Vision Science 73, no. 4 (Apr. 1996): 283-92. Russell, G. E., and B.Wick. “A Prospective Study of Treatment of Accommodative Insufficiency.” Optometry & Vision Science 70, no. 2 (Feb. 1993): 131-5. Solan, H. A., J. Feldman, and L. Tujak. “Developing Visual and Reading Efficiency in Older Adults.” Optometry & Vision Science 72, no. 2 (Feb. 1995): 139-45. Wood, J. M., and B. Abernethy. “An Assessment of the Efficacy of Sports Vision Training Programs.” Optometry & Vision Science 74, no. 8 (Aug. 1997): 646-59. ORGANIZATIONS

American Optometric Association. 243 North Lindbergh Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63141. (314) 991-4100. . Prevent Blindness America. 500 East Remington Road, Schaumburg, IL 60173. (800) 331-2020. .

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Visual impairment Definition Total blindness is the inability to tell light from dark, or the total inability to see. Visual impairment or low vision is a severe reduction in vision that can’t be corrected with standard glasses or contact lenses and reduces a person’s ability to function at certain or all tasks. Legal blindness (which is actually a severe visual impairment) refers to a best-corrected central vision of 20/200 or worse in the better eye or a visual acuity of better than 20/200 but with a visual field no greater than 20° (e.g., side vision that is so reduced that it appears as if the person is looking through a tunnel).

Description Vision is normally measured using a Snellen chart. A Snellen chart has letters of different sizes that are read, one eye at a time, from a distance of 20 ft. People with normal vision are able to read the 20 ft line at 20 ft— 20/20 vision—or the 40 ft line at 40 ft, the 100 ft line at 100 ft, and so forth. If at 20 ft the smallest readable letter is larger, vision is designated as the distance from the chart over the size of the smallest letter that can be read. Eye care professionals measure vision in many ways. Clarity (sharpness) of vision indicates how well a person’s central visual status is. The diopter is the unit of measure for refractive errors such as nearsightedness, farsightedness, and astigmatism and indicates the strength of corrective lenses needed. People do not just see straight ahead; the entire area of vision is called the visual field. Some people have good vision (e.g., see clearly) but have areas of reduced or no vision (blind spots) in parts of their visual field. Others have good vision in the center but poor vision around the edges (peripheral visual field). People with very poor vision may be able only to count fingers at a given distance from their eyes. This distance becomes the measure of their ability to see. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines impaired vision in five categories: • Low vision 1 is a best corrected visual acuity of 20/70. • Low vision 2 starts at 20/200. • Blindness 3 is below 20/400. • Blindness 4 is worse than 5/300 3509

Visual impairment

KEY TERMS

Visual impairment

• Blindness 5 is no light perception at all. • A visual field between 5° and 10° (compared with a normal visual field of about 120°) goes into category 3; less than 5° into category 4, even if the tiny spot of central vision is perfect. Color blindness is the reduced ability to perceive certain colors, usually red and green. It is a hereditary defect and affects very few tasks. Contrast sensitivity describes the ability to distinguish one object from another. A person with reduced contrast sensitivity may have problems seeing things in the fog because of the decrease in contrast between the object and the fog. According to the WHO there are over forty million people worldwide whose vision is category 3 or worse, 80% of whom live in developing countries. Half of the blind population in the United States is over 65 years of age.

ivermectin. Nevertheless, twenty-eight million people have the disease, and 40% of them are blind from it. Other causes Exposure of a pregnant woman to certain diseases (e.g., rubella or toxoplasmosis) can cause congenital eye problems. Injuries to the eyes can result in blindness. Very little blindness is due to disease in the brain or the optic nerves. Multiple sclerosis and similar nervous system diseases, brain tumors, diseases of the eye sockets, and head injuries are rare causes of blindness. Nutrition Vitamin A deficiency is a widespread cause of corneal degeneration in children in developing nations. As many as five million children develop xerophthalmia from this deficiency each year. Five percent end up blind.

Causes and symptoms The leading causes of blindness include: • macular degeneration • glaucoma • cataracts • diabetes mellitus Other possible causes include infections, injury, or nutrition. Infections Most infectious eye diseases have been eliminated in the industrialized nations by sanitation, medication, and public health measures. Viral infections are the main exception to this statement. Some infections that may lead to visual impairment include: • Herpes simplex keratitis. A viral infection of the cornea. Repeated occurrences may lead to corneal scarring. • Trachoma. This disease is responsible for six to nine million cases of blindness around the world, of the third of a billion who have the disease. Trachoma is caused by an incomplete bacterium, Chlamydia trachomatis, that is easily treated with standard antibiotics. It is transmitted directly from eye to eye, mostly by flies. The chlamydia gradually destroy the cornea. • Leprosy (Hansen’s disease). This is another bacterial disease that has a high affinity for the eyes. It, too, can be effectively treated with medicines. • River blindness. Much of the tropics of the Eastern Hemisphere are infested with Onchocerca volvulus, a worm that causes “river blindness.” This worm is transmitted by fly bites and can be treated with a drug called 3510

Diagnosis A low vision exam is slightly different from a general exam. While a case history, visual status, and eye health evaluation are common to both exams, some things do differ. Eye charts other than a Snellen eye chart will be used. Testing distance will vary. A trial frame worn by the patient is usually used instead of the instrument containing the lenses the patient sits behind (phoropter). Because the low vision exam is slightly more goal oriented than a general exam, for example, what specifically is the patient having trouble with (reading, seeing street signs, etc.) different optical and nonoptical aids will generally be tried. Eye health is the last thing to be checked so that the lights necessary to examine the eyes won’t interfere with the rest of the testing.

Treatment There are many options for patients with visual impairment. There are optical and nonoptical aids. Optical aids include: • Telescopes. May be used to read street signs. • Hand magnifiers. May be used to read labels on things at the store. • Stand magnifiers. May be used to read. • Prisms. May be used to move the image onto a healthy part of the retina in some eye diseases. • Closed circuit television (CCTV). For large magnification (e.g., for reading). Nonoptical aids can include large print books and magazines, check-writing guides, large print dials on the telephone, and more. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Prognosis The prognosis generally relates to the severity of the impairment and the ability of the aids to correct it. A good low vision exam is important to be aware of the latest low vision aids.

Prevention Regular eye exams are important to detect silent eye problems (e.g., glaucoma). Left untreated, glaucoma can result in blindness. Corneal infections can be treated with effective antibiotics. When a cornea has become opaque beyond recovery it must be transplanted. Good hygiene (e.g., washing hands frequently) to prevent infection, proper use of contact lenses, and not sharing makeup are just some ways to guard against corneal infections. Cataracts should be removed when they interfere with a person’s quality of life. Primary prevention addresses the causes before they ever begin. Fly control can be accomplished by simple sanitation methods. Public health measures can reduce the incidence of many infectious diseases. Vitamin A supplementation (when appropriate) will eliminate xerophthalmia completely. It is possible that protecting the eyes against ultraviolet (UV) light will reduce the incidence of cataracts, macular degeneration, and some other eye diseases. UV coatings can be placed on regular glasses, sunglasses, and ski goggles. Patients should ask their eye care professional about UV coatings. Protective goggles should also be worn in certain situations (e.g., certain jobs, sports, even mowing the lawn). Secondary prevention addresses treating established diseases before they cause irreversible eye damage. Having general physical checkups can also detect systemic diseases such as diabetes or high blood pressure. Control of diabetes is very important in preserving sight.

KEY TERMS Cornea—The clear dome-shaped structure that’s part of the front of the eye. It lies in front of the colored part of the eye (iris). Diabetic retinopathy—Retinal disease caused by the damage diabetes does to small blood vessels. Phoropter—The instrument used to measure refractive status of the eyes. It contains many lenses which are then changed in front of the eyes while the patient is looking at an eye chart. This is when the doctor usually asks, “Which is better, one or two?” Xerophthalmia—A drying of the cornea and conjunctiva.

Riordan-Eva, Paul. “Blindness.” In General Ophthalmology. 13th ed. Ed. Daniel Vaughan. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1993. Sardegna, Jill Otis, and T. Paul, The Encyclopedia of Blindness and Vision Impairment. New York: Facts on File, Inc., 1990. ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street, P.O. Box 7424, San Francisco, CA 94120-7424. . American Foundation for the Blind. 11 Penn Plaza, Suite 300, New York, NY 10001. (800) 232-5463. Guide Dogs for the Blind. P.O. Box 1200, San Rafael, CA 94915. (415) 499-4000. International Eye Foundation. 7801 Norfolk Ave., Bethesda, MD 20814. (301) 986-1830. The Lighthouse National Center for Education. 111 E. 59th Street. New York, NY 10022. (800) 334-5497. National Association for the Visually Handicapped. 22 West 21st St., New York, NY 10010. (212) 889-3141. National Center For Sight. (800) 221-3004. National Children’s Eye Care Foundation. One Clinic Center, A3-108, Cleveland, OH 44195. (216) 444-0488. National Eye Institute. 2020 Vision Place, Bethesda, MD 20892-3655. (301) 496-5248. . National Federation of the Blind. 1800 Johnson St., Baltimore, MD 21230. (301) 569-9314. Prevent Blindness America. 500 East Remington Road, Schaumburg, IL 60173. (800) 331-2020. . Research to Prevent Blindness. 598 Madison Ave., New York, NY 10022. (212) 363-3911.

Resources BOOKS

Bennett, J. Claude, and Fred Plum, eds. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Visualization see Guided imagery 3511

Visual impairment

For those who are blind, there are enormous resources available to improve the quality of life. For the legally blind, financial assistance for help may be possible. Braille and audio books are increasingly available. Guide dogs provide well-trained eyes and independence. Orientation and mobility training is available. There are special schools for blind children and access to disability support through Social Security and private institutions.

Vitamin A deficiency

Vitamin A deficiency Definition Vitamin A deficiency exists when the chronic failure to eat sufficient amounts of vitamin A or beta-carotene results in levels of blood-serum vitamin A that are below a defined range. Beta-carotene is a form of pre-vitamin A, which is readily converted to vitamin A in the body. Night blindness is the first symptom of vitamin A deficiency. Prolonged and severe vitamin A deficiency can produce total and irreversible blindness.

Description Vitamin A (called retinol in mammals) is a fat-soluble vitamin. The recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for vitamin A is 1.0 mg/day for the adult man and 0.8 mg/day for the adult woman. Since beta-carotene is converted to vitamin A in the body, the body’s requirement for vitamin A can be supplied entirely by beta-carotene. Six mg of beta-carotene are considered to be the equivalent of 1 mg of vitamin A. The best sources of vitamin A are eggs, milk, butter, liver, and fish, such as herring, sardines, and tuna. Beef is a poor source of vitamin A. Plants do not contain vitamin A, but they do contain betacarotene and other carotenoids. The best sources of betacarotene are dark-green, orange, and yellow vegetables; spinach, carrots, oranges, and sweet potatoes are excellent examples. Cereals are poor sources of beta-carotene. Vitamin A is used for two functions in the body. Used in the eye, it is a component of the eye’s light-sensitive parts, containing rods and cones, that allow for night-vision or for seeing in dim-light circumstances. Vitamin A (retinol) occurs in the rods. Another form of Vitamin A, retinoic acid, is used in the body for regulating the development of various tissues, such as the cells of the skin, and the lining of the lungs and intestines. Vitamin A is important during embryological development, since, without vitamin A, the fertilized egg cannot develop into a fetus.

Causes and symptoms Vitamin A deficiency occurs with the chronic consumption of diets that are deficient in both vitamin A and beta-carotene. When vitamin A deficiency exists in the developed world, it tends to happen in alcoholics or in people with diseases that affect the intestine’s ability to absorb fat. Examples of such diseases are celiac disease (chronic nutritional disorder), cystic fibrosis, and cholestasis (bile-flow failure or interference). Vitamin A deficiency occurred in infants during the early 1900s in 3512

Denmark. The deficiency resulted when milk fat was made into butter for export, leaving the by-product (skimmed milk) for infant feeding. Vitamin A deficiency has taken place in infants in impoverished populations in India, where the only foods fed to the infants were low in beta-carotene. Vitamin A deficiency is also common in areas like Southeast Asia, where polished rice, which lacks the vitamin, is a major part of the diet. The earliest symptom of vitamin A deficiency is night blindness. Prolonged deficiency results in drying of the conjunctiva (the mucous membrane that lines the inner surface of the eyelids and extends over the forepart of the eyeball). With continued vitamin A deficiency, the drying extends to the cornea (xerophthalamia). The cornea eventually shrivels up and becomes ulcerated (keratinomalacia). Superficial, foamy gray triangular spots may appear in the white of the eye (Bitot’s spots). Finally, inflammation and infection occur in the interior of the eye, resulting in total and irreversible blindness.

Diagnosis Vitamin A status is measured by tests for retinol. Blood-serum retinol concentrations of 30-60 mg/dl are considered in the normal range. Levels that fall below this range indicate vitamin A deficiency. Night blindness is measured by a technique called electroretinography. Xerophthalamia, keratinomalacia, and Bitot’s spots are diagnosed visually by trained medical personnel.

Treatment Vitamin A deficiency can be prevented or treated by taking vitamin supplements or by getting injections of the vitamin. The specific doses given are oral retinyl palmitate (110 mg), retinyl acetate (66 mg), or injected retinyl palmitate (55 mg) administered on each of two successive days, and once a few weeks later if symptoms are not relieved.

Prognosis The prognosis for correcting night blindness is excellent. Xerophthalamia can be corrected with vitamin A therapy. Ulcerations, tissue death, and total blindness, caused by severe vitamin A deficiency, cannot be treated with vitamin A.

Prevention Vitamin A deficiency can be prevented by including foods rich in vitamin A or beta-carotene as a regular component of the diet; liver, meat, eggs, milk, and dairy products are examples. Foods rich in beta-carotene include red GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Bitot’s spots—Bitot’s spots are superficial, foamy gray, triangular spots on the white of the eyeball. Carotenoids—Carotenoids are yellow to deep-red pigments. Conjunctiva—The conjunctiva is a clear layer of cells that covers the eye and directly contacts the atmosphere. The conjunctiva is about five-cells thick. Cornea—The cornea is a clear layer of cells that covers the eye, just under the conjunctiva. The cornea is about 50-cells thick. Fat-soluble vitamin—Fat-soluble vitamins can be dissolved in oil or in melted fat. Water-soluble vitamins can be dissolved in water or juice. Keratinomalacia—Keratinomalacia is ulceration of the cornea. Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)—The Recommended Dietary Allowances are quantities of nutrients in the diet that are required to maintain good health in people. RDAs are established by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences, and may be revised every few years. A separate RDA value exists for each nutrient. The RDA values refer to the amount of nutrient expected to maintain good health in people. The actual amounts of each nutrient required to maintain good health in specific individuals differ from person to person. Xerophthalmia—Xerophthalmia is a dry, thickened, lusterless condition of the eyeball resulting from vitamin A deficiency.

peppers, carrots, pumpkins, as well as those just mentioned. Margarine is rich in beta-carotene, because this chemical is used as a coloring agent in margarine production. In Africa, Indonesia, and the Philippines, vitamin A deficiency is prevented by public health programs that supply children with injections of the vitamin. Resources BOOKS

Brody, T. Nutritional Biochemistry. San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 1998. Combs, G. The Vitamins. San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 1992. Food and Nutrition Board. Recommended Dietary Allowances. 10th ed. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1989. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Filteau, S. M., and A. M. Tomkins.”Vitamin A Supplementation in Developing Countries.” Archives of Disease in Childhood 72 (1995): 106-109.

Tom Brody, PhD

Vitamin B1 see Beriberi Vitamin B2 deficiency see Riboflavin deficiency

Vitamin B6 deficiency Definition Vitamin B6 is used by the body as a catalyst in reactions that involve amino acids. Vitamin B6 deficiency is rare, since most foods eaten contain the vitamin.

Description Vitamin B6 is a water-soluble vitamin. The recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for vitamin B6 is 2.0 mg/day for the adult man and 1.6 mg/day for the adult woman. Vitamin B6 in the diet generally occurs as a form called pyridoxal phosphate. In this form, it cannot be absorbed by the body. During the process of digestion, the phosphate group is removed, and pyridoxal is produced. However, the body readily absorbs pyridoxal, and converts it back to the active form of the vitamin (pyridoxal phosphate). Poultry, fish, liver, and eggs are good sources of vitamin B6, comprising about 3-4 mg vitamin/kg food; meat and milk contain lesser amounts of the vitamin. The vitamin also occurs, at about half this level, in a variety of plant foods, including beans, broccoli, cabbage, and peas. Vitamin B6 tends to be destroyed with prolonged cooking, with storage, or with exposure to light. As mentioned, vitamin B6 takes various forms. One of these forms, called pyridoxine, is relatively stable. For this reason, pyridoxine is the form of vitamin B6 that is used in vitamin supplements, or when foods are fortified. Apples and other fruits are poor sources of the vitamin, containing only 0.2-0.6 mg vitamin/kg food. Vitamin B6, used mainly in the body for the processing of amino acids, performs this task along with certain enzymes. The enzyme that participates in this type of complex is aminotransferase. Several types of aminotransferase exist. With vitamin B6 deficiency, while aminotransferase continues to occur in the various organs of the body, 3513

Vitamin B6 deficiency

PERIODICALS

Vitamin B6 deficiency

KEY TERMS Amino acid—Amino acids are small molecules that are used as building blocks for all proteins. Some amino acids are also used in the body for the manufacture of hormones. There are about 20 nutritionally important amino acids, including glutamic acid, glycine, methionine, lysine, tryptophan, serine, and glycine. Fat-soluble vitamins—Fat-soluble vitamins can be dissolved in oil or in melted fat. Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)—The Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) are quantities of nutrients in the diet that are required to maintain good health in people. RDAs are established by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences, and may be revised every few years. A separate RDA value exists for each nutrient. The RDA values refer to the amount of nutrient expected to maintain good health in people. The actual amounts of each nutrient required to maintain good health in specific individuals differ from person to person. Water-soluble vitamins—Water-soluble vitamins can be dissolved in water or juice.

there is an abnormally low level of the active vitamin B6/aminotransferase complex present. Thus, this vitamin deficiency results in the impairment of a variety of activities in the body. With supplement correction of the vitamin B6 deficiency, the aminotransferase then readily forms the active complex, and normal metabolism is restored. Vitamin B6 converts certain amino acids (glutamic acid, aspartic acid, glycine) to energy. This allows the body to process all dietary protein, even when the dietary protein is in excess of the body’s needs. Vitamin B6 also allows the body to synthesize certain amino acids. For example, if the diet is deficient or low in certain amino acids, such as glycine or serine, vitamin B6 enables the body to make them from sugar. Vitamin B6 is used also for the synthesis of certain hormones, such as adrenaline.

Causes and symptoms Vitamin B6 deficiency occurs rarely. When it does, it is usually associated with poor absorption of nutrients in the gastrointestinal tract (as in alcoholism, or with chronic diarrhea), the taking of certain drugs (as isoniazid, hydrolazine, penicillamine) that inactivate the vita3514

min, with genetic disorders that inhibit metabolism of the vitamin, or in cases of starvation. The symptoms of vitamin B6 deficiency in adults are only vaguely defined. These include nervousness, irritability, insomnia, muscle weakness, and difficulty in walking. Vitamin B6 deficiency may produce fissures and cracking at the corners of the mouth. The deficiency occurred in infants fed early versions of commercial canned infant formula, when the vitamin had been inadvertently omitted from the formula. This error resulted in infants failing to grow, in irritability, and in seizures.

Diagnosis Vitamin B6 status is measured by the transaminase stimulation test. This test requires extraction of red blood cells, and placement of the cells in two test tubes. Special chemicals (reagents) are added to both test tubes to allow for measurement of aminotransferase. This enzyme requires pyridoxal phosphate. A known quantity of pure pyridoxal phosphate is added to one of the test tubes. The activity level of the enzyme is measured, and compared, in both test tubes. If the added pyridoxal phosphate did not stimulate activity, the patient is considered not to be deficient in vitamin B6. Neither is the patient considered deficient if only slight stimulation occurred. But if a stimulation of four-fold or more occurred, a vitamin B6 deficiency is present.

Treatment Vitamin B6 deficiency can be prevented or treated with consumption of the recommended dietary allowance, as supplied by food or by vitamin supplements.

Prognosis The prognosis for correcting vitamin B6 deficiency is excellent.

Prevention Vitamin B6 deficiency is not a major concern for most people. The deficiency can be prevented with consumption of a mixed diet that includes poultry, fish, eggs, meat, vegetables, and grains. Resources BOOKS

Brody, T. Nutritional Biochemistry. San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 1998. Combs, G. The Vitamins. San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 1992. Food and Nutrition Board. Recommended Dietary Allowances. 10th ed. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1989. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

“Intakes of B Vitamins from Diet and Supplements.” Nutrition Research Newletter (Apr. 1997): 46.

Tom Brody, PhD

Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia see Pernicious anemia Vitamin C deficiency see Scurvy

Vitamin D deficiency

bloodstream. The maintenance of calcium at a constant level is absolutely required for human life to exist, since dissolved calcium is required for nerves and muscles to work. One of the ways in which 1,25-diOH-D accomplishes this mission is by stimulating the absorption of dietary calcium by the intestines. The sequence of events that can lead to vitamin D deficiency, then to bone disease, is as follows: a lack of vitamin D in the body creates an inability to manufacture 1,25-diOH-D, which results in decreased absorption of dietary calcium and increased loss of calcium in the feces. When this happens, the bones are affected. Vitamin D deficiency results in a lack of bone mineralization (calcification) in growing persons, or in an increased demineralization (decalcification) of bone in adults.

Definition Vitamin D deficiency exists when the concentration of 25-hydroxy-vitamin D (25-OH-D) in the blood serum occurs at 12 ng/ml (nanograms/milliliter), or less. The normal concentration of 25-hydroxy-vitamin D in the blood serum is 25-50 ng/ml. When vitamin D deficiency continues for many months in growing children, the disease commonly referred to as rickets will occur. A prolonged deficiency of the vitamin in adults results in osteomalacia. Both diseases involve defects in bones.

Description Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin, meaning it is able to be dissolved in fat. While some vitamin D is supplied by the diet, most of it is made in the body. To make vitamin D, cholesterol, a sterol that is widely distributed in animal tissues and occurs in the yolk of eggs, as well as in various oils and fats, is necessary. Once cholesterol is available in the body, a slight alteration in the cholesterol molecule occurs, with one change taking place in the skin. This alteration requires the energy of sunlight (or ultraviolet light). Vitamin D deficiency, as well as rickets and osteomalacia, tends to occur in persons who do not get enough sunlight and who fail to eat foods that are rich in vitamin D. Once consumed, or made in the body, vitamin D is further altered to produce a hormone called 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D (1,25-diOH-D). The conversion of vitamin D to 1,25-diOH-D does not occur in the skin, but in the liver and kidney. First, vitamin D is converted to 25OH-D in the liver; it then enters the bloodstream, where it is taken-up by the kidneys. At this point, it is converted to 1,25-diOH-D. Therefore, the manufacture of 1,25diOH-D requires the participation of various organs of the body—the liver, kidney, and skin. The purpose of 1,25-diOH-D in the body is to keep the concentration of calcium at a constant level in the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Causes and symptoms Vitamin D deficiency can be caused by conditions that result in little exposure to sunlight. These conditions include: living in northern countries; having dark skin; being elderly or an infant, and having little chance to go outside; and covering one’s face and body, such as for religious reasons. Many Arab women cover the entire body with black cloth, and wear a veil and black gloves when they go outside. These women may acquire vitamin D deficiency, even though they live in a sunny climate. Most foods contain little or no vitamin D. As a result, sunshine is often a deciding factor in whether vitamin D deficiency occurs. Although fortified milk and fortified infant formula contain high levels of vitamin D, human breast milk is rather low in the vitamin. The term fortified means that vitamins are added to the food by the manufacturer. To say that a food is high or low in vitamin D means how much of that food needs to be eaten in order to prevent vitamin deficiency and maintain good health. An exact meaning can be provided by comparing the Recommended Dietary Allowance of vitamin D with the amount of vitamin D supplied by a particular food per day. The Recommended Dietary Allowance, also referred to as RDA, is a recommendation based on data derived from different population groups and ages. The RDA for vitamin D for adults is 200 International Units (IU) per day, and can be supplied by eating approximately 1.5 kg of beef, 2.0 kg of corn oil, or 100 kg of cabbage. Few people, though, would want to eat a kilogram of beef in one day, and no human being is capable of eating 100 kg of cabbage in a day; therefore, these foods are poor sources of vitamin D. However, saltwater fish such as salmon, herring, and sardines are rich in vitamin D, supplied from the oils produced by these fish. The RDA can also be supplied by eating roughly 50 g of salmon or 2.0 g of cod liver oil, 3515

Vitamin D deficiency

PERIODICALS

Vitamin D deficiency

and since fortified milk contains 400 IU per quart, half a quart of milk provides the RDA. For comparison, human breast milk contains only 4 to 60 IU per quart. No harm is likely to result from vitamin D deficiency that occurs for only a few days a year. If the deficiency occurs for a period of many months or years, however, rickets or osteomalacia may develop. The symptoms of rickets include bowed legs and bowed arms. The bowed appearance is due to the softening of bones, and their bending if the bones are weight-bearing. Bone growth occurs through the creation of new cartilage, a soft substance at the ends of bones. When the mineral calcium phosphate is deposited onto the cartilage, a hard structure is created. In vitamin D deficiency, though, calcium is not available to create hardened bone, and the result is soft bone. Other symptoms of rickets include particular bony bumps on the ribs called rachitic rosary (beadlike prominences at the junction of the ribs with their cartilages) and knock-knees. Seizures may also occasionally occur in a child with rickets, because of reduced levels of dissolved calcium in the bloodstream. Although osteomalacia is rare in the United States, symptoms of this disease include reduced bone strength, an increase in bone fractures, and sometimes bone pain, muscle weakness, and a waddling walk.

Diagnosis Vitamin D deficiency is diagnosed by measuring the level of 25-hydroxy-vitamin D in the blood serum. The normal level or concentration of this form of the vitamin ranges from 25-50 ng/ml. Deficiency occurs when this level decreases to about 12 ng/ml or less. As mentioned previously, 25-OH-D is not the active form of the vitamin. It must be converted to 1,25-diOH-D in order to cause responses in various organs of the body. However, the levels of vitamin D, or of 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D in the blood, do not give a reliable picture of whether a person is deficient in the vitamin. For this reason, they are not measured when testing for vitamin D deficiency. Rickets is diagnosed by x-ray examination of leg bones. A distinct pattern of irregularities, abnormalities, and a coarse appearance can be clearly seen with rickets. Osteomalacia is also diagnosed with x-ray examination. Measurements of blood plasma 25-OH-D, blood plasma calcium, and blood plasma parathyroid hormone must also be obtained for the diagnosis of these diseases. Parathyroid hormone and 1,25-diOH-D work together in the body to regulate the levels of calcium in the blood.

Treatment Rickets heals promptly with 4,000 IU of oral vitamin D per day administered for approximately one 3516

month. During this treatment, the doctor should monitor the levels of 25-OH-D in the plasma to make certain they are raised to a normal value. The bone abnormalities (visible by x ray) generally disappear gradually over a period of 3-9 months. Parents are instructed to take their infants outdoors for approximately 20 minutes per day with their faces exposed. Children should also be encouraged to play outside. Foods that are good sources of vitamin D include cod liver oil, egg yolks, butter, and oily fish. Some foods, including milk and breakfast cereals, are also fortified with synthetic vitamin D. Osteomalacia is treated by eating 2,500 IU per day of vitamin D for about three months. Measurements of 25-OH-D, calcium, and parathyroid hormone should be obtained after the treatment period to make sure the therapy did, in fact, result in normal blood values. Care must be taken in treating vitamin D deficiency, since high doses of vitamin D are toxic and can result in the permanent deposit of minerals in the heart, lungs, and kidneys. Symptoms of toxicity are nausea, vomiting, pain in joints, and lack of interest in eating food. In adults, vitamin D toxicity occurs with eating 50,000 IU or more per day. In infants, toxicity occurs with 1,000 IU per day. The continued intake of toxic doses results in death. Rickets and osteomalacia are almost always treated with oral supplements of vitamin D, with the recommendation to acquire daily exposure to direct sunlight. An alternative to sunlight is the use of an ultraviolet (UV) lamp. When using UV lamps, the eyes must be covered to protect them against damage. Many types of sunglasses allow UV light to pass through, so only those that are opaque to UV light should be used. Attempts to acquire sunlight through glass windows fail to help the body make vitamin D. This is because UV light does not pass through window glass. Rickets may also occur with calcium deficiency, even when a child is regularly exposed to sunshine. This type of rickets has been found in various parts of Africa. The bone deformities are similar to, or are the same as, those that occur in typical rickets; however, calcium deficiency rickets is treated by increasing the amount of calcium in the diet. No amount of vitamin D can cure the rickets of a child with a diet that is extremely low in calcium. For this reason, it is recommended that calcium be given in conjunction with vitamin D supplementation.

Prognosis The prognoses for correcting vitamin D deficiency, rickets, and osteomalacia are excellent. Vitamin D treatment results in the return of bone mineralization to a normal rate, the correction of low plasma calcium levels, the prevention of seizures, and a recovery from bone pain. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

25-hydroxy-vitamin D—This is the form of vitamin D that is measured in order to assess vitamin D deficiency. Cholesterol—A fat-soluble steroid alcohol (sterol) found in animal fats and oils, and in egg yolks. The human body needs cholesterol to produce vitamin D. Fat-soluble vitamin—A vitamin that dissolves easily in fat or oil, but not in water. The fat-soluble vitamins are vitamins D, E, A, and K. International unit (IU)—A measurement of biological activity in which one IU is equal to one mg (milligram). Osteomalacia—Osteomalacia is a bone disease that occurs in adults and is caused by a prolonged period of vitamin D deficiency. Rachitic rosary—Beadlike bumps present at the junction of the ribs with their cartilages—often seen in children with rickets. Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)—The amount of nutrients, including vitamins, that should be supplied by foods on a daily basis to maintain normal health. Recommendations are based on data obtained from different population groups and ages. Rickets—Rickets is a bone disease that occurs in infants and growing children and is caused by a prolonged period of vitamin D deficiency.

Resources BOOKS

Brody, Tom. “Vitamin D.” In Nutritional Biochemistry. San Diego: Academic Press, 1994. Collins, E. D., and Anthony Norman. “Vitamin D.” In Handbook of Vitamins, ed. Lawrence Machlin. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1991. Feldman, D. Vitamin D. San Diego: Academic Press, 1997. Food and Nutrition Board. “Vitamin D.” In Recommended Dietary Allowances. 10th ed. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1989. PERIODICALS

Binet, A., and S.W. Kooh. “Persistence of Vitamin D-Deficiency Rickets in Toronto in the 1990s.” Cancer Journal of Public Health (July/Aug. 1996): 227-230. El-Sonbaty, M. R., and N. Abdul-Ghaffar.”Vitamin D Deficiency in Veiled Kuwaiti Women.” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 50 (1996): 315-318. Kinyamu, H., et al. “Serum Vitamin D Metabolites and Calcium Absorption in Normal Young and Elderly Free-Living Women and in Women Living in Nursing Homes.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 65 (1997): 790-797.

Tom Brody, PhD

Vitamin E deficiency Definition

On the other hand, deformities such as bowed legs and the rachitic rosary persist throughout adult life.

Prevention Food fortification has almost completely eliminated rickets in the United States. Vitamin D deficiency can be prevented by acquiring the RDA through drinking fortified milk and eating fortified cereals. For those who cannot drink milk, supplements of pills might be considered. In some older people, a 400 IU supplement may not be enough to result in the normal absorption of calcium; therefore, daily doses of 10,000 IU per day may be needed. For infants who are fed only breast milk (and rarely exposed to sunshine), a daily supplement of 200-300 IU is recommended. Rickets continues to be a problem in Africans and Asian Indians who migrate to Canada or Great Britain, GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vitamin E deficiency is a very rare problem that results in damage to nerves. When vitamin E deficiency does occur, it strikes people with diseases that prevent the absorption of dietary fats and fat-soluble nutrients. Since vitamin E is a fat-soluble vitamin, it has some of the properties of fat.

Description The recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for vitamin E is 10 mg/day for the adult man, 8 mg/day for the adult woman, and 3 mg/day for the infant. Vitamin E occurs in foods in a variety of related forms. The most potent and useful form of vitamin E is called alpha-tocopherol. The best sources of vitamin E are vegetable oils, such as corn oil, soy oil, and peanut oil. Animal fats, such as butter and lard, contain lower levels of the vitamin. Corn oil contains about 16 mg of alpha-tocopherol per 100 3517

Vitamin E deficiency

KEY TERMS

especially where these immigrants do not drink fortified milk. Prevention of rickets in these populations is attempted through educational programs sponsored by the government.

Vitamin E deficiency

Causes and symptoms

KEY TERMS Fat-soluble vitamin—Fat-soluble vitamins can be dissolved in oil or in melted fat. Recommended Dietary Allowance—The Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) are quantities of nutrients in the diet that are required to maintain good health in people. RDAs are established by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences, and may be revised every few years. A separate RDA value exists for each nutrient. The RDA values refer to the amount of nutrient expected to maintain good health in people. The actual amounts of each nutrient required to maintain good health in specific individuals differ from person to person. Toxic oxygen—Oxygen is required for life, as it is needed for energy production. When oxygen is used by the body, most of it is converted to water. However, a small fraction of the oxygen breathed is converted to toxic oxygen. The body uses several different processes for preventing and repairing toxic-oxygen damage. One of these processes involves vitamin E. Water-soluble vitamins—Water-soluble vitamins can be dissolved in water or juice.

g oil. Wheat-germ oil contains 120 mg alpha-tocopherol per 100 g oil. Fish, eggs, and beef contain relatively low levels of the vitamin, with about 1 mg per 100 g food. Vitamin E seems to have only one function in the body: the prevention of the natural and continual process of deterioration of all body tissues. This deterioration is provoked by a number of causes; one of these is toxic oxygen. During the body’s metabolism of atmospheric oxygen, toxic oxygen is produced continuously in the body by the formation of by-products. These toxic by-products include hydrogen peroxide, superoxide, and hypochlorite. Hypochlorite is a natural product, produced by cells of the immune system. It is also the active component of bleach. Once formed, toxic oxygen can damage various parts of the body, such as the membranes which form the boundaries of every cell. Vitamin E serves the body in protecting membranes from toxic oxygen damage. In contrast, vitamin C serves to protect the aqueous, or watery, regions of the cell from toxic oxygen damage. The membranes that are most sensitive to toxic oxygen damage are the membranes of nerves; therefore, the main symptom of vitamin E deficiency is damage to the nervous system. 3518

As mentioned, when vitamin E deficiency occurs, it strikes people with diseases that prevent the absorption of dietary fats and fat-soluble nutrients. These diseases include cystic fibrosis, pancreatitis, and cholestasis (bile-flow obstruction). Bile salts, produced in the liver, are required for the absorption of fats. Cholestasis causes a decrease in the formation of bile salts and the consequent failure of the body to absorb dietary fats. For this reason, this disease may result in vitamin E deficiency. Premature infants may be at risk for vitamin E deficiency because they may be born with low tissue levels of the vitamin, and because they have a poorly developed capacity for absorbing dietary fats. Infants suffering from fat-malabsorption diseases can develop symptoms of vitamin E deficiency by age two. In adults, the onset of a fat-malabsorption disease can provoke vitamin E deficiency after a longer period, as an example, ten years. Vitamin E deficiency in humans results in ataxia (poor muscle coordination with shaky movements), decreased sensation to vibration, lack of reflexes, and paralysis of eye muscles. One particularly severe symptom of vitamin E deficiency is the inability to walk.

Diagnosis Vitamin E status is measured by assessment of the content of alpha-tocopherol in the blood plasma, using a method called high-pressure liquid chromatography. Blood plasma levels of alpha-tocopherol that are 5.0 mg/l, or above, indicate normal vitamin E status; levels below 5.0 mg/l indicate vitamin E deficiency.

Treatment Vitamin E deficiency that occurs with cholestatic liver disease, or other malabsorption syndromes, can be treated with weekly injections of 100 mg alpha-tocopherol that may continue for six months.Vitamin E deficiency in premature infants may require treatment for only a few weeks.

Prognosis The prognosis for correcting the neurological symptoms of vitamin E deficiency is fair to excellent.

Prevention The prevention of vitamin E deficiency should not be a concern for most people, since the vitamin is found in a wide variety of foods. Attention has been given to the theory that vitamin E serves to protect against cancer and atherosclerosis. The evidence that normal levels of GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Resources BOOKS

Brody, T. Nutritional Biochemistry. San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 1998. Combs, G. The Vitamins. San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 1992. Food and Nutrition Board. Recommended Dietary Allowances. 10th ed. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1989. PERIODICALS

Tanyel, Mary C. Mahlon, and Louis D. Mancano. “Neurologic findings in vitamin E deficiency.” American Family Physician (Jan. 1997): 197+. “Vitamin E deficiency and progressive ataxia.” Nutrition Research Newsletter (Mar. 1994): 30.

Tom Brody, PhD

Vitamin K deficiency Definition Vitamin K deficiency exists when chronic failure to eat sufficient amounts of vitamin K results in a tendency for spontaneous bleeding or in prolonged and excessive bleeding with trauma or injury. Vitamin K deficiency occurs also in newborn infants, as well as in people treated with certain antibiotics. The protein in the body most affected by vitamin K deficiency is a blood-clotting protein called prothrombin.

Description Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin. The recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for vitamin K is 80 mg/day for the adult man, 65 mg/day for the adult woman, and 5 mg/day for the newborn infant. The vitamin K present in plant foods is called phylloquinone; while the form of the vitamin present in animal foods is called menaquinone. Both of these vitamins are absorbed from the diet and converted to an active form called dihydrovitamin K. Spinach, lettuce, broccoli, brussels sprouts, and cabbage are good sources of vitamin K, containing about 8 mg vitamin K/kg food. Cow milk is also a good source of the vitamin. A portion of the body’s vitamin K is supplied by bacteria living in the intestine rather than by dietary sources. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vitamin K plays an important role in blood clotting. Without the vitamin, even a small cut would cause continuous bleeding in the body, and death. Blood clotting is a process that begins automatically when any injury produces a tear in a blood vessel. The process of blood clotting involves a collection of molecules, which circulate continuously through the bloodstream. When an injury occurs, these molecules rapidly assemble and form the blood clot. The clotting factors are proteins, and include proteins called Factor II, Factor VII, Factor IX, and Factor X. Factor II is also called prothrombin. These proteins require vitamin K for their synthesis in the body. The blood-clotting process also requires a dozen other proteins that do not need vitamin K for their synthesis.

Causes and symptoms Newborns are especially prone to vitamin K deficiency. A nursing-mother’s milk is low in the vitamin; breast milk can supply only about 20% of the infant’s requirement. Infants are born with low levels of vitamin K in their body; they do not have any vitamin K-producing bacteria in their intestines. Their digestive tracts are sterile. As a result, a form of vitamin K deficiency, called hemorrhagic disease of the newborn, may develop. This disease involves spontaneous bleeding beneath the skin or elsewhere in the infant’s body, and occurs in about 1% of all infants. In rare cases, it causes death due to spontaneous bleeding in the brain. Vitamin K deficiency in adults is rare. When it occurs, it is found in people with diseases that prevent the absorption of fat. These diseases include cystic fibrosis, celiac disease, and cholestasis. Vitamin K deficiency can exist in adults treated with antibiotics that kill the bacteria that normally live in the digestive tract. As mentioned, the intestine-bacteria supply part of our daily requirement of vitamin K. Vitamin K deficiency can result in bleeding gums, and in skin that is easily bruised.

Diagnosis Vitamin K status is measured by the prothrombin time test. The normal prothrombin time is about 13 seconds. With vitamin K deficiency, the prothrombin time can be several minutes. The test involves taking a sample of blood, placing it in a machine called a fibrometer, and measuring the time it takes for blood-clot formation. Blood-clotting problems can also be caused by a rare genetic disease called hemophilia. Hemophilia is not related to vitamin K deficiency. Once vitamin K deficiency is suspected, further tests must be used to distinguish it from possible hemophilia. Where a bleeding dis3519

Vitamin K deficiency

vitamin E protect against atherosclerosis is fairly convincing. However, there is little or no proof that vitamin E intake, above and beyond the recommended daily allowance (RDA), can prevent cancer or atherosclerosis.

Vitamin tests

Resources

KEY TERMS Fat-soluble vitamin—Fat-soluble vitamins can be dissolved in oil or in melted fat. Hemorrhage—Bleeding that continues for an abnormally long period of time. Prothrombin—Prothrombin is a blood-clotting protein. Injury to a blood vessel produces a signal which triggers the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin. Thrombin is a protein which plays a central role in provoking the assembly of other proteins to form the blood clot. Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)—The Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) are quantities of nutrients in the diet that are required to maintain good health in people. RDAs are established by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences, and may be revised every few years. A separate RDA value exists for each nutrient. The RDA values refer to the amount of nutrient expected to maintain good health in people. The actual amounts of each nutrient required to maintain good health in specific individuals differ from person to person. Water-soluble vitamins—Water-soluble vitamins can be dissolved in water or juice.

order can be corrected by vitamin K treatment, the diagnosis of vitamin K deficiency is proven to be correct.

Treatment Vitamin K deficiency in newborn infants is treated and prevented with a single injection of phylloquinone (5 mg). Adults with vitamin K deficiency are treated with daily oral doses of 10 mg phylloquinone for one week.

Prognosis The prognosis for correcting vitamin K deficiency, and associated blood-clotting problems, is excellent.

Prevention Aside from newborns and young infants, vitamin K deficiency is not a concern for the general population. Vitamin K deficiency can be prevented by assuring that the diet contains foods such as spinach, cabbage, brussels sprouts, and eggs. Soybean oil, canola oil, and olive oil are good sources of the vitamin, while corn oil and peanut oil are very poor sources. 3520

BOOKS

Brody, T. Nutritional Biochemistry. San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 1998. Combs, G. The Vitamins. San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 1992. Food and Nutrition Board. Recommended Dietary Allowances. 10th ed. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1989. PERIODICALS

Suttie, J. W. “The importance of menaquinones in human nutrition.” Annual Review of Nutrition 15 (1995): 399-417.

Tom Brody, PhD

Vitamin poisoning see Vitamin toxicity

Vitamin tests Definition Vitamin tests measure the levels of certain vitamins in an individual’s blood. They are generally used to aid in the diagnosis of vitamin deficiencies or in detecting toxic amounts of a vitamin in a patient’s system.

Purpose Vitamins are components of food that are needed for growth, reproduction, and maintaining good health. The vitamins include vitamin D, vitamin E, vitamin A, and vitamin K, which are the fat-soluble vitamins, and folate, vitamin B12, biotin, vitamin B6, niacin, thiamin, riboflavin, pantothenic acid, and ascorbic acid, which are the water-soluble vitamins. Vitamins are required in the diet in only tiny amounts, in contrast to the energy components of the diet, such as sugars, starches, and fats. However, not receiving sufficient quantities of a certain vitamin can be devastating, resulting in vitamin deficiency diseases such as scurvy, pellagra, or rickets. Conversely, consuming too much of a certain vitamin can be toxic to a person’s system. Vitamin tests are used to assess the level of certain vitamins in an individual’s blood so that doctors can more accurately diagnose vitamin deficiency diseases or vitamin overdoses and devise effective therapy. The vitamins that are most commonly measured by doctors are folate, vitamin B12, vitamin K, vitamin D, and vitamin A.

Description Most of the vitamin tests are conducted by acquiring a sample of blood, and then preparing plasma or serum GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Levels of some vitamins may be measured indirectly by a biological test that mimics the actual function of the vitamin in the body. Riboflavin status is often measured by a test in which the rate by which a certain enzyme converts one molecule into another indicates how much Vitamin B2 is present in a person’s blood. Vitamin K is often measured by a test that times how long it takes for a spontaneous blood clot to form in a prepared sample. Vitamin E status is often measured by placing the red blood cells in a test tube, adding hydrogen peroxide, and the assessing the resulting breakdown of the red blood cells. When a vitamin E deficiency exists, the red blood cells have a greater tendency to break.

Preparation Most vitamin tests require no preparation; however, some may require that the patient fast for at least eight hours before giving a blood sample, or stop using some medications.

The normal ranges for levels of certain vitamins are as follows. Please note that, by convention, the units referring to the levels of each of the vitamins may differ from each other. The units picogram/milliliter (pg/mL), nanogram/milliliter (ng/mL), and micrograms per deciliter (micrograms/dL) refer to the weight of vitamin in the specified volume. The units nanomoles/liter (nmol/L) and micromoles/liter (M/L) refer to the concentration of vitamin in the specified volume. • folate (folic acid). 3.1-18.0 ng/mL • vitamin B12. 200-1100 pg/mL • thiamin. 9-44 nmol/L • riboflavin. 6.2-39 nmol/L • vitamin B6. 7-52 ng/mL • vitamin C (asorbic acid). 28-84 M/L • vitamin A. 28-94 micrograms/dL • vitamin D. (25-hydroxy-vitamin D). 25-50 ng/mL • vitamin K. 80-1160 pg/mL

Abnormal results In all cases, abnormal results fall below or above the normal concentration range. However, as noted above, values that are considered to be borderline or severely abnormal can differ according to the discretion of the medical laboratory or physician. Resources BOOKS

Brody, Tom. Nutritional Biochemistry. San Diego: Academic Press, 1998. Combs, Gerald. The Vitamins. San Diego: Academic Press, 1992. Nollet, L. Handbook of Food Analysis. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc., 1996.

Tom Brody, PhD

Normal results The values that are considered to be normal for each vitamin can vary slightly. This variability can arise from different testing machines or from different types of chemistry that are used in conducting the vitamin assays. In interpreting data on plasma vitamin levels, it should also be noted that different normal ranges may exist for different age groups and genders. For example, the normal range for plasma vitamin B6 for males is 7-52 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) for males and 2-26 ng/mL for females. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vitamin toxicity Definition Vitamin toxicity is a condition in which a person develops symptoms as side effects from taking massive doses of vitamins. Vitamins vary in the amounts that are required to cause toxicity and in the specific symptoms that result. Vitamin toxicity, which is also called hypervitaminosis or vitamin poisoning, is becoming more common in developed countries because of the popularity of 3521

Vitamin toxicity

from the blood sample. Each vitamin occurs at extremely small concentrations when compared to levels of most other molecules in the blood. Blood contains a great number of chemicals and molecules, and many of these tend to interfere with the vitamin tests. For this reason, a procedure that separates the vitamin from contaminating substances is usually performed immediately prior to conducting the actual test. Most laboratories use high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), also called high performance liquid chromatography, as this purification step. In HPLC, the sample is pumped at high pressure through a tube lined with an absorbent material, to which the different molecules cling at different rates. Following separation or purification by HPLC, the vitamin is detected by a color reaction or fluorescence reaction. In these reactions, the amount of color or fluorescence that is formed is proportional to the amount of vitamin in the sample, allowing the analyst to calculate the amount of vitamin present in the original sample. In the case of some vitamins, the purified vitamin is reacted with a special chemical (reagent) prior to detection.

Vitamin toxicity

vitamin supplements. Many people treat themselves for minor illnesses with large doses (megadoses) of vitamins.

C may protect people from cancer. On the other hand, other researchers have gathered indirect evidence that vitamin C megadoses may cause cancer.

Description Overview Vitamins are organic molecules in food that are needed in small amounts for growth, reproduction, and the maintenance of good health. Some vitamins can be dissolved in oil or melted fat. These fat-soluble vitamins include vitamin D, vitamin E, vitamin A (retinol), and vitamin K. Other vitamins can be dissolved in water. These water-soluble vitamins include folate (folic acid), vitamin B12, biotin, vitamin B6, niacin, thiamin, riboflavin, pantothenic acid, and vitamin C (ascorbic acid). Taking too much of any vitamin can produce a toxic effect. Vitamin A and vitamin D are the most likely to produce hypervitaminosis in large doses, while riboflavin, pantothenic acid, biotin, and vitamin C appear to be the least likely to cause problems. Vitamins in medical treatment Vitamin supplements are used for the treatment of various diseases or for reducing the risk of certain diseases. For example, moderate supplements of folic acid appear to reduce the risk for certain birth defects (neural tube defects), and possibly reduce the risk of cancer. Therapy for diseases brings with it the risk for irreversible vitamin toxicity only in the case of vitamin D. This vitamin is toxic at levels which are only moderately greater than the recommended dietary allowance (RDA). Niacin is commonly used as a drug for the treatment of heart disease. Niacin is far less toxic than vitamin D. Vitamin toxicity is not a risk with medically supervised therapy using any of the other vitamins. Vitamin megadoses With the exception of folic acid supplements, the practice of taking vitamin supplements by healthy individuals has little or no relation to good health. Most adults in the United States can obtain enough vitamins by eating a well-balanced diet. It has, however, become increasingly common for people to take vitamins at levels far greater than the RDA. These high levels are sometimes called vitamin megadoses. Megadoses are harmless for most vitamins. But in the cases of a few of the vitamins—specifically vitamin D, vitamin A, and vitamin B6—megadoses can be harmful or fatal. Researchers have also started to look more closely at megadoses of vitamin C and of vitamin E, since indirect evidence suggests that these two vitamins may reduce the risks of cancer, heart disease, and aging. It is not yet clear whether megadoses of either of these vitamins has any influence on health. Some experts think that megadoses of vitamin 3522

Causes and symptoms Fat-soluble vitamins VITAMIN D. Vitamin D and vitamin A are the most toxic of the fat-soluble vitamins. The symptoms of vitamin D toxicity are nausea, vomiting, pain in the joints, and loss of appetite. The patient may experience constipation alternating with diarrhea, or have tingling sensations in the mouth. The toxic dose of vitamin D depends on its frequency. In infants, a single dose of 15 mg or greater may be toxic, but it is also the case that daily doses of 1.0 mg over a prolonged period may be toxic. In adults, a daily dose of 1.0-2.0 mg of vitamin D is toxic when consumed for a prolonged period. A single dose of about 50 mg or greater is toxic for adults. The immediate effect of an overdose of vitamin D is abdominal cramps, nausea and vomiting. Toxic doses of vitamin D taken over a prolonged period of time result in irreversible deposits of calcium crystals in the soft tissues of the body that may damage the heart, lungs, and kidneys. VITAMIN A. Vitamin A toxicity can occur with longterm consumption of 20 mg of retinol or more per day. The symptoms of vitamin A overdosing include accumulation of water in the brain (hydrocephalus), vomiting, tiredness, constipation, bone pain, and severe headaches. The skin may acquire a rough and dry appearance, with hair loss and brittle nails. Vitamin A toxicity is a special issue during pregnancy. Expectant mothers who take 10 mg vitamin A or more on a daily basis may have an infant with birth defects. These birth defects include abnormalities of the face, nervous system, heart, and thymus gland. It is possible to take in toxic levels of vitamin A by eating large quantities of certain foods. For example, about 30 grams of beef liver, 500 grams of eggs, or 2,500 grams of mackerel would supply 10 mg of retinol. The livers of polar bears and other arctic animals may contain especially high levels of vitamin A. VITAMIN E. Megadoses of vitamin E may produce headaches, tiredness, double vision, and diarrhea in humans. Studies with animals fed large doses of vitamin E have revealed that this vitamin may interfere with the absorption of other fat-soluble vitamins. The term absorption means the transfer of the vitamin from the gut into the bloodstream. Thus, large doses of vitamin E consumed over many weeks or months might result in deficiencies of vitamin D, vitamin A, and vitamin K. VITAMIN K. Prolonged consumption of megadoses of vitamin K (menadione) results in anemia, which is a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Water-soluble vitamins FOLATE. Folate occurs in various forms in food. There are over a dozen related forms of folate. The folate in oral vitamin supplements occurs in only one form, however—folic acid. Large doses of folic acid (20 grams/day) can result in eventual kidney damage. Folate is considered, however, to be relatively nontoxic, except in cases where folate supplementation can lead to pernicious anemia. VITAMIN B12. Vitamin B12 is important in the treatment of pernicious anemia. Pernicious anemia is more common among middle-aged and older adults; it is usually detected in patients between the ages of 40 and 80. The disease affects about 0.1% of all persons in the general population in the United States, and about 3% of the elderly population. Pernicious anemia is treated with large doses of vitamin B12. Typically, 0.1 mg of the vitamin is injected each week until the symptoms of pernicious anemia disappear. The patient then takes oral doses of vitamin B12 for the rest of his or her life. Although vitamin B12 toxicity is not an issue for patients being treated for pernicious anemia, treatment of these patients with folic acid may cause problems. Specifically, pernicious anemia is often first detected because the patient feels weak or tired. If the anemia is not treated, the patient may suffer irreversible nerve damage. The problem with folic acid supplements is that the folic acid treatment prevents the anemia from developing, but allows the eventual nerve damage to occur. VITAMIN B6. Vitamin B6 is clearly toxic at doses about 1000 times the RDA. Daily doses of 2-5 grams of one specific form of this vitamin can produce difficulty in walking and tingling sensations in the legs and soles of the feet. Continued megadoses of vitamin B6 result in further unsteadiness, difficulty in handling small objects, and numbness in the hands. When the high doses are stopped, recovery begins after two months. Complete recovery may take two to three years. VITAMIN C. The RDA for vitamin C in adults is 60 mg per day. Large doses of vitamin C are considered to be

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

toxic in persons with a family history of or tendency to form kidney stones or gallbladder stones. Kidney and gallbladder stones usually consist of calcium oxalate. Oxalate occurs in high concentrations in foods such as cocoa, chocolate, rhubarb, and spinach. A fraction of the vitamin C in the body is normally broken down in the body to produce oxalate. A daily supplement of 3.0 grams of vitamin C has been found to double the level of oxalate that passes through the kidneys and is excreted into the urine. NIACIN. The RDA for niacin is 15-19 mg per day in adults. Niacin comes in two forms, nicotinic acid and nicotinamide. Either form can satisfy the adult requirement for this vitamin. Nicotinic acid, however, is toxic at levels of 100 times the RDA. It can cause flushing of the skin, nausea, diarrhea, and liver damage. Flushing is an increase in blood passing through the veins in the skin, due to the dilation of arteries passing through deeper parts of the face or other parts of the body. In spite of the side effects, however, large doses of nicotinic acid are often used to lower blood cholesterol in order to prevent heart disease. Nicotinic acid results in a lowering of LDL-cholesterol (“bad cholesterol”), an increase in HDL-cholesterol (“good cholesterol”), and a decrease in plasma triglycerides. Treatment involves daily doses of 1.5-4.0 grams of nicotinic acid per day. Flushing of the skin occurs as a side effect when nicotinic acid therapy is started, but may disappear with continued therapy.

Diagnosis The diagnosis of vitamin toxicity is usually made on the basis of the patient’s dietary or medical history. Questioning the patient about the use of vitamin supplements may shed light on some of his or her physical symptoms. With some vitamins, the doctor can confirm the diagnosis by ordering blood or urine tests for specific vitamins. When large amounts of the water-soluble vitamins are consumed, a large fraction of the vitamin is absorbed into the bloodstream and promptly excreted into the urine. The fat-soluble vitamins are more likely to be absorbed into the bloodstream and deposited in the fat and other tissues. In the cases of both water-soluble and fat-soluble vitamins, any vitamin not absorbed by the intestines is excreted in the feces. Megadoses of many of the vitamins produce diarrhea, because the non-absorbed nutrient draws water out of the body and into the gut, resulting in the loss of this water from the body.

Treatment In all cases, treatment of vitamin toxicity requires discontinuing vitamin supplements. Vitamin D toxicity needs additional action to reduce the calcium levels in the bloodstream because it can cause abnormally high levels of 3523

Vitamin toxicity

reduced level of red blood cells in the bloodstream. When large doses of menadione are given to infants, they result in the deposit of pigments in the brain, nerve damage, the destruction of red blood cells (hemolysis), and death. A daily injection of 10 mg of menadione into an infant for three days can kill the child. This tragic fact was discovered during the early days of vitamin research, when newborn infants were injected with menadione to prevent a disease known as hemorrhagic disease of the newborn. Today a different form of vitamin K is used to protect infants against this disease.

Vitamins

Resources

KEY TERMS Absorption—The transfer of a vitamin from the digestive tract to the bloodstream. Ascorbic acid—Another name for vitamin C. Hypercalcemia—Hypercalcemia is a condition marked by abnormally high levels of calcium in the blood. It is an issue during vitamin D toxicity. Hypervitaminosis—Another name for vitamin toxicity. Megadose—A very large dose of a vitamin, taken by some people as a form of self-medication. Menadione—A synthetic form of vitamin K. It is sometimes called vitamin K3. Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)—The recommended dietary allowances (RDAs) are the quantities of nutrients in the diet that are needed for good health. RDAs are established by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences and may be revised every few years. Retinol—Another name for vitamin A.

plasma calcium (hypercalcemia). Severe hypercalcemia is a medical emergency and may be treated by infusing a solution of 0.9% sodium chloride into the patient’s bloodstream. The infusion consists of two to three liters of salt water given over a period of one to two days.

Prognosis The prognosis for reversing vitamin toxicity is excellent for most patients. Side effects usually go away as soon as overdoses are stopped. The exceptions are severe vitamin D toxicity, severe vitamin A toxicity, and severe vitamin B6 toxicity. Too much vitamin D leads to deposits of calcium salts in the soft tissue of the body, which cannot be reversed. Birth defects due to vitamin A toxicity cannot be reversed. Damage to the nervous system caused by megadoses of vitamin B6 can be reversed, but complete reversal may require a recovery period of over a year.

Prevention Vitamin toxicity can be prevented by minimizing the use of vitamin supplements. If vitamin D supplements are being used on a doctor’s orders, vitamin toxicity can be prevented by monitoring the levels of plasma calcium. The development of hypercalcemia with vitamin D treatment indicates that the patient is at risk for vitamin D toxicity. 3524

BOOKS

Brody, Tom. Nutritional Biochemistry. San Diego: Academic Press, 1998. Combs, Gerald. The Vitamins. San Diego: Academic Press, Inc., 1992. Food and Nutrition Board. Recommended Dietary Allowances. 10th ed. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1989. PERIODICALS

Markestad, T., et al. “Intermittent Digh-dose Vitamin D Prophylaxis During Infancy: Effect on Vitamin D Metabolites, Calcium, and Phosphorus.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 46 (1987): 652-658. Tzimas, G., et al. “Embryotoxic Doses of Vitamin A to Rabbits Result in Low Plasma but High Embryonic Concentrations of All-trans-retinoic Acid: Risk of Vitamin A Exposure in Humans.” Journal of Nutrition 126 (1996): 2159-2171.

Tom Brody, PhD

Vitamins Definition Vitamins are organic components in food that are needed in very small amounts for growth and for maintaining good health. The vitamins include vitamin D, vitamin E, vitamin A, and vitamin K, or the fat-soluble vitamins, and folate (folic acid), vitamin B12, biotin, vitamin B6, niacin, thiamin, riboflavin, pantothenic acid, and vitamin C (ascorbic acid), or the water-soluble vitamins. Vitamins are required in the diet in only tiny amounts, in contrast to the energy components of the diet. The energy components of the diet are sugars, starches, fats, and oils, and these occur in relatively large amounts in the diet. Most of the vitamins are closely associated with a corresponding vitamin deficiency disease. Vitamin D deficiency causes rickets, a disease of the bones. Vitamin E deficiency occurs only very rarely, and causes nerve damage. Vitamin A deficiency is common throughout the poorer parts of the world, and causes night blindness. Severe vitamin A deficiency can result in xerophthalamia, a disease which, if left untreated, results in total blindness. Vitamin K deficiency results in spontaneous bleeding. Mild or moderate folate deficiency is common throughout the world, and can result from the failure to eat green, leafy vegetables or fruits and fruit juices. Folate deficiency causes megaloblastic anemia, which is characterized by the presence of large abnormal cells called megaloblasts in the circulating blood. The symptoms of megaloblastic anemia are tiredness and weakness. Vitamin B12 deficiency occurs with GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vitamins

Essential Vitamins Vitamin

What It Does For The Body

Vitamin A (Beta Carotene)

Promotes growth and repair of body tissues; reduces susceptibility to infections; aids in bone and teeth formation; maintains smooth skin Promotes growth and muscle tone; aids in the proper functioning of the muscles, heart, and nervous system; assists in digestion of carbohydrates Maintains good vision and healthy skin, hair, and nails; assists in formation of antibodies and red blood cells; aids in carbohydrate, fat, and protein metabolism Reduces cholesterol levels in the blood; maintains healthy skin, tongue, and digestive system; improves blood circulation; increases energy Fortifies white blood cells; helps the body’s resistance to stress; builds cells Aids in the synthesis and breakdown of amino acids and the metabolism of fats and carbohydrates; supports the central nervous system; maintains healthy skin Promotes growth in children; prevents anemia by regenerating red blood cells; aids in the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins; maintains healthy nervous system Aids in the metabolism of proteins and fats; promotes healthy skin Helps the liver eliminate toxins Promotes the growth and reproduction of body cells; aids in the formation of red blood cells and bone marrow One of the major antioxidants; essential for healthy teeth, gums, and bones; helps to heal wounds, fractures, and scar tissue; builds resistance to infections; assists in the prevention and treatment of the common cold; prevents scurvy Improves the absorption of calcium and phosphorous (essential in the formation of healthy bones and teeth) maintains nervous system A major antioxidant; supplies oxygen to blood; provides nourishment to cells; prevents blood clots; slows cellular aging Prevents internal bleeding; reduces heavy menstrual flow

Vitamin B-1 (Thiamin) Vitamin B-2 (Riboflavin) Vitamin B-3 (Niacinamide) Vitamin B-5 Vitamin B-6 (Pyridoxine) Vitamin B-12 (Cobalamin) Biotin Choline Folic Acid (Folate, Folacin) Vitamin C (Ascorbic Acid) Vitamin D Vitamin E Vitamin K (Menadione)

the failure to consume meat, milk or other dairy products. Vitamin B12 deficiency causes megaloblastic anemia and, if severe enough, can result in irreversible nerve damage. Niacin deficiency results in pellagra. Pellagra involves skin rashes and scabs, diarrhea, and mental depression. Thiamin deficiency results in beriberi, a disease resulting in atrophy, weakness of the legs, nerve damage, and heart failure. Vitamin C deficiency results in scurvy, a disease that involves bleeding. Specific diseases uniquely associated with deficiencies in vitamin B6, riboflavin, or pantothenic acid have not been found in the humans, though persons who have been starving, or consuming poor diets for several months, might be expected to be deficient in most of the nutrients, including vitamin B6, riboflavin, and pantothenic acid. Some of the vitamins serve only one function in the body, while other vitamins serve a variety of unrelated functions. Hence, some vitamin deficiencies tend to result in one type of defect, while other deficiencies result in a variety of problems.

Purpose People are treated with vitamins for three reasons. The primary reason is to relieve a vitamin deficiency, when one has been detected. Chemical tests suitable for the detection of all vitamin deficiencies are available. The diagnosis of vitamin deficiency is often aided by visual tests, such as the examination of blood cells with a microscope, the x ray examination of bones, or a visual examination of the eyes or skin. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

A second reason for vitamin treatment is to prevent the development of an expected deficiency. Here, vitamins are administered even with no test for possible deficiency. One example is vitamin K treatment of newborn infants to prevent bleeding. Food supplementation is another form of vitamin treatment. The vitamin D added to foods serves the purpose of preventing the deficiency from occurring in persons who may not be exposed much to sunlight and who fail to consume foods that are fortified with vitamin D, such as milk. Niacin supplementation prevents pellagra, a disease that occurs in people who rely heavily on corn as the main source of food, and who do not eat much meat or milk. In general, the American food supply is fortified with niacin. A third reason for vitamin treatment is to reduce the risk for diseases that may occur even when vitamin deficiency cannot be detected by chemical tests. One example is folate deficiency. The risk for cardiovascular disease can be slightly reduced for a large fraction of the population by folic acid supplements. And the risk for certain birth defects can be sharply reduced in certain women by folic acid supplements. Vitamin treatment is important during specific diseases where the body’s normal processing of a vitamin is impaired. In these cases, high doses of the needed vitamin can force the body to process or utilize it in the normal manner. One example is pernicious anemia, a disease that tends to occur in middle age or old age, and impairs the absorption of vitamin B12. Surveys have revealed that about 0.1% of the general population, and 2-3% of the elderly, may have the disease. If left untreat3525

Vitamins

KEY TERMS Genetic disease—A genetic disease is a disease that is passed from one generation to the next, but does not necessarily appear in each generation. An example of genetic disease is Down’s syndrome. Plasma—Blood consists of red and white cells, as well as other components, that float in a liquid. This liquid is called plasma. Recommended dietary allowance (RDA)—The Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) are quantities of nutrients of the diet that are required to maintain human health. RDAs are established by the Food and Nutrition Board of the National Academy of Sciences and may be revised every few years. A separate RDA value exists for each nutrient. The RDA values refer to the amount of nutrient expected to maintain health in the greatest number of people. Serum—Serum is blood plasma with the blood clotting proteins removed. Serum is prepared by removing blood from the subject, allowing the blood naturally to form a blood clot, and then using a centrifuge to remove the red blood cells and the blood clot. The blood clot takes the form of an indistinct clump. Vitamin status—Vitamin status refers to the state of vitamin sufficiency or deficiency of any person. For example, a test may reveal that a patient’s folate status is sufficient, borderline, or severely inadequate.

ed, pernicous anemia leads to nervous system damage. The disease can easily be treated with large oral daily doses of vitamin B12 (hydroxocobalamin) or with monthly injections of the vitamin. Vitamin supplements are widely available as overthe-counter products. But whether they work to prevent or curtail certain illnesses, particularly in people with a balanced diet, is a matter of debate and ongoing research. For example, vitamin C is not proven to prevent the common cold. Yet, millions of people take it for that reason. Ask a physician or pharmacist for more information on the appropriate use of multivitamin supplements.

Precautions Vitamin A and vitamin D can be toxic in high doses. Side effects range from dizziness to kidney failure. Ask a 3526

physician or pharmacist about the correct use of a multivitamin supplement that contains these vitamins.

Description Vitamin treatment is usually done in three ways: by replacing a poor diet with one that supplies the recommended dietary allowance, by consuming oral supplements, or by injections. Injections are useful for persons with diseases that prevent absorption of fat-soluble vitamins. Oral vitamin supplements are especially useful for persons who otherwise cannot or will not consume food that is a good vitamin source, such as meat, milk or other dairy products. For example, a vegetarian who will not consume meat may be encouraged to consume oral supplements of vitamin B12. Treatment of genetic diseases which impair the absorption or utilization of specific vitamins may require megadoses of the vitamin throughout one’s lifetime. Megadose means a level of about 10-1,000 times greater than the RDA. Pernicious anemia, homocystinuria, and biotinidase deficiency are three examples of genetic diseases which are treated with megadoses of vitamins.

Preparation The diagnosis of a vitamin deficiency usually involves a blood test. An overnight fast is usually recommended as preparation prior to withdrawal of the blood test so that vitamin-fortified foods do not affect the test results.

Aftercare The response to vitamin treatment can be monitored by chemical tests, by an examination of red blood cells or white blood cells, or by physiological tests, depending on the exact vitamin deficiency.

Risks Few risks are associated with vitamin treatment. Any possible risks depend on the vitamin and the reason why it was prescribed. Ask a physician or pharmacist about how and when to take vitamin supplements, particularly those that have not been prescribed by a physician. Resources BOOKS

Brody, Tom. Nutritional Biochemistry. San Diego: Academic Press, 1998. Combs, Gerald. The Vitamins. San Diego: Academic Press, 1992. Food and Nutrition Board. Recommended Dietary Allowances. 10th ed. Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1989.

Tom Brody, PhD GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vitiligo

Vitiligo Definition Vitiligo is a condition in which a loss of cells that give color to the skin (melanocytes) results in smooth, white patches in the midst of normally pigmented skin.

Description Vitiligo is a common, often inherited disorder characterized by areas of well-defined, milky white skin. People with vitiligo may have eye abnormalities and also have a higher incidence of thyroid disease, diabetes mellitus, and pernicious anemia. Vitiligo affects about 1-2% of the world’s population. It is more easily observed in sun-exposed areas of the body and in darker skin types, but it affects any area of the body and all races. Vitiligo seems to affect men and women equally, although women more frequently seek treatment for the disorder. Vitiligo may appear as one or two well-defined white patches or it may appear over large portions of the body. Typical sites for generalized vitiligo are areas surrounding body openings, bony areas, fingers, and toes. It can begin at any age but about 50% of the time it starts before the age of 20.

Causes and symptoms Vitiligo is a disorder with complex causes. People with vitiligo seem to inherit a genetic predisposition for the disorder, and the appearance of disorder can be brought on by a variety of precipitating causes. Many people report that their vitiligo first appeared following a traumatic or stressful event, such as an accident, job loss, death of a family member, severe sunburn, or serious illness. There are at least three theories about the underlying mechanism of vitiligo. One theory says nerve endings in the skin release a chemical that is toxic to the melanocytes. A second theory states that the melanocytes simply self-destruct. The third explanation is that vitiligo is a type of autoimmune disease in which the immune system targets the body’s own cells and tissues. The primary symptom of vitiligo is the loss of skin color. Hair growing from the affected skin areas also lacks color. In addition, people with vitiligo may have pigment abnormalities of the retina or iris of the eyes. A minority of patients also may have inflammation of the retina or iris, but vision is not usually impaired.

Diagnosis The diagnosis of vitiligo is usually made by observation. Progressive, white areas found at typical sites point GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Loss of pigmentation is one characteristic of vitiligo, as seen on this woman’s hand. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

to a diagnosis of vitiligo. If the diagnosis is not certain, the doctor will test for other conditions which can mimic vitiligo, such as chemical leukoderma or systemic lupus erythematosus. If the tests rule out other conditions, vitiligo is confirmed.

Treatment Vitiligo cannot be cured, but it can be managed. Cosmetics can be used to improve the appearance of the white areas not covered by clothing. Sunscreens prevent burning of the affected areas and also prevent the normal skin around the patches from becoming darker. Skin creams and oral medications are available for severe cases, but they have side effects that may make them undesirable. Autologous transplantation of skin is an option for those who are severely affected. Bleaching or depigmentation of the normal skin is another option. In addition to treating the skin, attention should be paid to the psychological well-being of the individual. Extreme cases of vitiligo can be unattractive and may affect a person’s outlook and social interactions.

Prognosis The condition is usually gradually progressive. Sometimes the patches grow rapidly over a short period, and then the condition remains stable for many years.

Prevention No measures are currently known to prevent vitiligo. Resources BOOKS

Fitzpatrick, Thomas B., et al., eds. Dermatology in General Medicine. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993. 3527

Vitrectomy

KEY TERMS Autoimmune disease—A condition in which something triggers the immune system to react against and attack the body’s own tissues. Autologous transplantation—A procedure wherein the person donates blood or tissue to themselves. Iris—The colored part of the eye. Pernicious anemia—A disease in which red blood cells are abnormally formed due to the body’s inability to absorb vitamin B12. Retina—The innermost layer of the eye, it contains the rods and cones, specialized light-sensitive cells.

Professional Guide to Diseases. 5th ed. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1995. ORGANIZATIONS

Frontier’s International Vitiligo Foundation. 4 Rozina Court, Owings Mills, MD 21117. (301) 594-0958. National Foundation for Vitiligo and Pigment Disorders. 9032 South Normandy Drive, Centerville, OH 45459. (513) 885-5739. National Vitiligo Foundation. P.O. Box 6337, Tyler, TX 75703. (903) 531-9767. 73071.33@compuserve.com.

Vitrectomy is a surgical procedure in which the vitreous, the transparent gel that fills the eye from the iris to the retina, is removed. During this procedure, the surgeon penetrates the eyeball with a tiny instrument (shown above), which liquefies the vitreous and suctions it out of the eye. (Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

the inside of the back of the eye. On occasion the retina will fall into the vitreous, a condition called retinal detachment. This may be due to disease in the vitreous that pulls the retina inward, small tears in the retina that allow liquid to seep behind it and push it forward, or injury to the eye that simply breaks the retina loose. It may be necessary to remove the vitreous in order to replace the retina and restore vision.

Description Dorothy Elinor Stonely

Vitrectomy Definition Vitrectomy is the surgical removal of the vitreous (transparent gel that fills the eye from the iris to the retina).

Purpose The bulk of the contents of the eyeball is a clear jelly-like substance that is susceptible to several afflictions that impair vision by damaging its transparency. • infections • injuries

Using instruments suited for microscopic surgery, the ophthalmologist (eye surgeon) penetrates the eyeball, aspirates the vitreous, and replaces it with saline. The saline replaces the vitreous at a constant pressure in order to keep the eye from collapsing. Once the saline is in place, both eyes are patched. The procedure takes two to three hours to complete.

Preparation Because this is a major operation on the eye, the surgeon will perform a very extensive evaluation of both eyes. After looking inside with a variety of lenses, a CT, MRI, or ultrasound study may be needed. Immediately prior to the vitrectomy, the pupils will be dilated.

Aftercare Eye drops and antibiotics are administered, and eye rest is advised until healing is completed.

• bleeding, particularly from diabetic retinopathy. • blood vessels growing into the vitreous, again due to diabetes The retina is the light-sensitive membrane that receives images and transmits them to the brain. It covers 3528

Risks Risks associated with vitrectomy are retinal detachment, bleeding, iatrogenic (medically caused) cataracts, and endophthalmitis (inflammation of the eyeball). GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS

Computed tomography (CT scan)—Computerized method of creating images of internal organs using x rays.

Laryngitis—Inflammation of the larynx (voice box).

Diabetic retinopathy—Disease that damages the blood vessels in the back of the eye caused by diabetes mellitus.

Lesion—A wound or injury. Otorhinolaryngologist—A physician specializing in ear, nose, and throat diseases. Also known as otolaryngologist.

Endophthalmitis—Inflammation of the eyeball. Iatrogenic—Inadvertently caused by medical treatment. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—Computerized method of creating images of internal organs using magnetic fields. Saline—A salt solution equivalent to that in the body—0.9% salt in water.

Normal results Vision is restored to useful levels in two-thirds of patients. Resources BOOKS

O’Malley, Conor. “Vitreous.” In General Ophthalmology. 13th ed. Ed. Daniel Vaughan. Stamford: Appleton & Lange, 1993. Sardegna, Jill, and T. Paul Otis. The Encyclopedia of Blindness and Vision Impairment. New York: Facts on File, Inc., 1990.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Vivax malaria see Malaria

Vocal cord nodules and polyps Definition Vocal cord nodules and polyps are noncancerous growths on the vocal cords that affect the voice.

Description The vocal cords, located in the voice box in the middle of the neck, are two tough, fibrous bands that vibrate to produce sound. They are covered with a layer of tissue that is similar to skin. With use, this layer thickens. With GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

heavy use, the thickening may localize, producing a nodule. Unlike skin, heavy usage over a short time may also produce polyps. A polyp is a soft, smooth lump containing mostly blood and blood vessels. A nodule is similar to a polyp, but tends to be firmer.

Causes and symptoms Chronic infections caused by allergies and inhalation of irritants, such as cigarette smoke, may produce these lesions, but extensive use of the voice is the most common cause of vocal nodules and polyps. Nodules and polyps are more common in male children, female adolescents, and female adults. This may be due in part to the faster speed at which the cords vibrate to produce higher-pitched voices. Voice alterations are most apparent in singers, who may notice the higher registers are the first to change. Hoarseness causes others to seek medical attention.

Diagnosis The head and neck surgeon (otorhinolaryngologist) must see the vocal cords to diagnose these lesions. It is also important to confirm that there are not other problems instead of or in addition to these benign lumps. Other causes of hoarseness include throat cancers, vocal cord paralysis, and simple laryngitis. The cords can usually be seen using a mirror placed at the back of the tongue. More elaborate scopes, including a videostroboscope, allow better views while the cords are producing sounds. A biopsy of a nodule or polyp will ensure they are not cancerous.

Treatment Voice rest is the first choice treatment for polyps. Polyps that appeared suddenly will resolve with a few days of complete silence. Nodules do not disappear with rest. Lesions that have been there longer may be slower to disappear and require voice training by a speech therapist. Nodules and polyps may be surgically removed, using either conventional techniques or lasers. 3529

Vocal cord nodules and polyps

KEY TERMS

Vocal cord paralysis

Prognosis

KEY TERMS

Continued overuse of the voice will cause these lesions to regrow.

Computed tomography (CT scan)—Computerized use of x rays to create images of internal organs.

Prevention Careful use of the voice will prevent most vocal cord nodules and polyps. Avoiding inhaled irritants, may also prevent nodules and polyps from forming. Resources BOOKS

Ballenger, John Jacob. Disorders of the Nose, Throat, Ear, Head, and Neck. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1991.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Vocal cord paralysis

Laryngoscope—A diagnostic instrument that is used to examine the interior of the larynx. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)—Computerized use of magnetic fields and radio-frequency signals to create images of internal organs. Recurrent laryngeal nerve—One of two offshoots of the vagus nerve that connect to the larynx. It is located below the larynx. Stridor—A raspy sound that occurs during respiration when the airways are blocked. Tracheostomy—Surgical opening in the neck to the trachea to aid respiration. Voice box—The larynx.

Definition Vocal cord paralysis is the inability to move the vocal cords and the resulting loss of vocal cord function.

Description The vocal cords are a pair of tough, fibrous bands that lie across the air column in the middle of the voice box. They assist three functions: breathing, swallowing, and speaking. When vocal cords vibrate, they produce sound, allowing us to speak. Vocal cords temporarily stop breathing to aid coughing and for expelling foreign objects. During swallowing, the vocal cords shut the airway so that food is not inhaled. When vocal cords are paralyzed, all three functions are affected. The relaxed position of the vocal cords is halfway open. There is one set of muscles that closes them all the way and one set that opens them. Each set of muscles is controlled by a different nerve. Each nerve comes from a different direction—one from above and one from below (the recurrent laryngeal nerve). Vocal cords can either be partially paralyzed on one side or completely paralyzed on both sides.

The most dangerous form of vocal cord paralysis is one that affects the opening function, controlled by the recurrent laryngeal nerve. If both vocal cords are paralyzed, breathing stops or becomes very labored. Fortunately, injury during trauma or surgery often involves only one side, but the congenital causes can damage both sides. Vocal cord paralysis produces several symptoms. • The voice is always affected; at best it is breathy and weak. At worst, it is not there at all. In infants, the cry can be weak. Older children will suppress laughing and coughing because it is hard to do. • Swallowing may be hindered so that food ends up in the airway, causing violent coughing and often leading to pneumonia. • Breathing is obstructed on inspiration, producing a condition known as stridor. Closing the airway while breathing in produces creaking noises in the throat and changes the shape of the chest. The breast bone is drawn inward, much more visibly in the flexible chest of a small child.

Causes and symptoms Vocal cord paralysis can result from injury, tumors, or surgery in the neck and upper chest. Brain tumors and stroke can also affect the nerves. Infectious diseases that damage nerves—like whooping cough, tetanus and polio—can also cause vocal cord paralysis. Vocal cord paralysis can also appear as a congenital defect. If congenital, the most frequent cause is a brain defect, which can often be effectively treated. 3530

Diagnosis The voice box must be observed during breathing to characterize the problem. A viewing instrument called a laryngoscope, either flexible or rigid, is passed through the nose or throat until the cords becomes visible. The motion of each cord can then be seen, and other problems in the area identified. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Treatment An adequate airway is immediately necessary, usually secured with an endotracheal tube in the windpipe. If a cure cannot be achieved, a permanent breathing hole (tracheostomy) is cut in the neck. Brain problems that are relieved within 24 hours usually allow the cords to regain their function. Care must be taken to assure that swallowing takes place normally.

Alternative treatment Vocal cord paralysis can be addressed with constitutional homeopathy. This will work with the whole person, not just the symptoms, to help bring about healing. Botanical medicine and deep tissue massage to the area can also bring some resolution, although it may not be long term. Resources BOOKS

Ballenger, John Jacob. Disorders of the Nose, Throat, Ear, Head, and Neck. Philadelphia: Lea & Febiger, 1991.

J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD

Vocal cord polyps see Vocal cord nodules and polyps Voiding cystourethrography see Retrograde urethrography Volvulus see Intestinal obstructions Vomiting see Nausea and vomiting; Cyclic vomiting syndrome; Hyperemesis gravidarum Von Gierke’s disease see Glycogen storage diseases Von Recklinghausen disease see Neurofibromatosis

von Willebrand disease Definition Von Willebrand disease is caused by a deficiency or an abnormality in a protein called von Willebrand factor and is characterized by prolonged bleeding. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Description The Finnish physician Erik von Willebrand was the first to describe von Willebrand disease (VWD). In 1926 Dr. von Willebrand noticed that many male and female members of a large family from the Aland Islands had increased bruising (bleeding into the skin) and prolonged episodes of bleeding. The severity of the bleeding varied between family members and ranged from mild to severe and typically involved the mouth, nose, genital and urinary tracts, and occasionally the intestinal tract. Excessive bleeding during the menstrual period was also experience by some of the women in this family. What differentiated this bleeding disorder from classical hemophilia was that it appeared not to be associated with muscle and joint bleeding and affected women and men rather than just men. Dr. von Willebrand named this disorder hereditary pseudohemophilia. Pseudohemophilia, or von Willebrand disease (VWD) as it is now called, is caused when the body does not produce enough of a protein called von Willebrand factor(vWF) or produces abnormal vWF. vWF is involved in the process of blood clotting (coagulation). Blood clotting is necessary to heal an injury to a blood vessel. When a blood vessel is injured, vWF enables blood cells called platelets to bind to the injured area and form a temporary plug to seal the hole and stop the bleeding. vWF is secreted by platelets and by the cells that line the inner wall of the blood vessels (endothelial cells). The platelets release other chemicals, called factors, in response to a blood vessel injury, which are involved in forming a strong permanent clot. vWF binds to and stabilizes factor VIII, one of the factors involved in forming the permanent clot. A deficiency or abnormality in vWF can interfere with the formation of the temporary platelet plug and also affect the normal survival of factor VIII, which can indirectly interfere with the production of the permanent clot. Individuals with VWD, therefore, have difficulty in forming blood clots and as a result they may bleed for longer periods of time. In most cases the bleeding is due to an obvious injury, although it can sometimes occur spontaneously. VWD is classified into three basic types: type 1, 2, and 3 based on the amount and type of vWF that is produced. Type 1 is the most common and mildest form and results when the body produces slightly decreased amounts of typically normal vWF. Type 2 can be classified into five subtypes (A,B,M,N) and results when the body produces an abnormal type of vWF. Type 3 is the rarest and most severe form and results when the body does not produce any detectable vWF. Approximately one out of 100 people are affected with VWD, making it the most common inherited bleed3531

von Willebrand disease

X rays, CT, or MRI scans of the skull may be done if a brain disorder is suspected.

von Willebrand disease

ing disorder (hemophilia). VWD affects people of all ethnic backgrounds. Approximately 70–80% of people with VWD have type 1 and close to 20–30% have type 2. Type 3 is very rare and occurs in less than one percent of people with VWD.

Causes and symptoms The genetics of VWD are complex and involve a gene that produces vWF and is found on chromosome 12. Since we inherit two of each type of chromosome we inherit two vWF genes. There are different types of changes in the vWF gene that can affect the production of vWF. Some types of changes can cause the vWF gene to produce decreased amounts of normal vWF, while other changes can cause the gene to produce abnormal vWF. Most of the gene changes are significant enough that a change in only one vWF gene is sufficient to cause VWD. Some gene changes only cause VWD if both genes are changed, which often leads to more severe symptoms. Type 1 VWD is called an autosomal dominant condition since it is caused by a change in only one vWF gene. Since type 1 VWD results in only a slight decrease in the amount of vWF produced, the symptoms are often mild and even non-existent in some patients. Most cases of Type 2 VWD are autosomal dominant since they are caused by a change in only one vWF gene that results in the production of an abnormal protein. An autosomal dominant form of VWD can be inherited from either parent or can occur spontaneously in the embryo that is formed when the egg and sperm cells come together during fertilization. Some cases of type 2 VWD and all cases of type 3 VWD are autosomal recessive since they are caused by changes in both vWF genes. A person with an autosomal recessive form of VWD has inherited a changed gene from his or her mother and a changed gene from his or her father. Parents who have a child with an autosomal recessive form of VWD are called carriers, since they each possess one changed vWF gene and one unchanged vWF gene. Many carriers for the autosomal recessive forms of type 2 VWD and type 3 VWD do not have any symptoms, although some people with type 3 VWD are born to parents who have type 1 VWD and may have symptoms. Each child born to parents who are both carriers for VWD has a 25% chance of having VWD, a 50% chance of being a carrier, and a 25% chance of being neither a carrier nor affected with VWD disease. A person with an autosomal dominant form of VWD has a 50% chance of passing the changed gene on to his or her children who may or may not have symptoms. VWD is usually a relatively mild disorder characterized by easy bruising, recurrent nosebleeds, heavy men3532

strual periods, and extended bleeding after surgeries and invasive dental work. There is a great deal of variability in the severity of symptoms, which can range from clinically insignificant to life threatening. Even people within the same family who are affected with the same type of VWD may exhibit different symptoms. An individual with VWD may exhibit a range of symptoms over the course of his or her lifetime and may experience an improvement in symptoms with age. The severity of the disease is partially related to the amount and type of vWF that the body produces, but is also influenced by other genetic and non-genetic factors. Type 1 Type 1, the mildest form of VWD, is usually associated with easy bruising, recurrent nosebleeds, heavy menstrual periods, and prolonged bleeding after surgeries and invasive work. Many people with type 1 VWD do not have any noticeable symptoms or only have prolonged bleeding after surgery or significant trauma. The amount of vWF produced by the body increases during pregnancy, so prolonged bleeding during delivery is uncommon in people with type 1 VWD. Type 2 People with type 2 VWD usually have symptoms from early childhood and symptoms may even be present at birth. They usually experience prolonged bleeding from cuts, easy bruising, nose bleeds, skin hematomas, and prolonged bleeding from the gums following teeth extraction and minor trauma. More than 50% of women with type 2 VWD experience heavy periods that may require a blood transfusion. Gastrointestinal bleeding is rare but can be life-threatening. Some women with type 2 VWD exhibit prolonged bleeding during delivery. Type 3 Type 3 VWD can be quite severe and is associated with bruising and bleeding from the mouth, nose, intestinal, genital and urinary tracts. Type 3 is also associated with spontaneous bleeding into the muscles and joints, which can result in joint deformities. Some women with type 3 VWD experience prolonged bleeding during delivery.

Diagnosis Diagnostic testing Many people with VWD have mild symptoms or symptoms that can be confused with other bleeding disorders making it difficult to diagnose VWD on the basis of clinical symptoms. VWD should be suspected in any person with a normal number of platelets in their blood GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• how long it takes for the bleeding to stop after a tiny cut is made in the skin (the bleeding time) • the amount of vWF (vWF antigen measurement) • the activity of vWF (ristocetin co-factor activity) • the amount of factor VIII (factor VIII antigen measurement) • activity of factor VIII People with type 1 VWD usually have an increased bleeding time but they may have an intermittently normal bleeding time. They also have a decreased amount of vWF, and decreased vWF activity and usually have slightly decreased factor VIII levels and activity. People with type 2 VWD have a prolonged bleeding time, decreased activity of vWF and may have decreased amounts of vWF and factor VIII, and may have decreased factor VIII activity. Type 3 individuals have undetectable amounts of vWF, negligible vWF activity, factor VIII levels of less than 5–10%, and significantly reduced factor VIII activity. The activity of vWF is reduced for all types of VWD, making it the most sensitive means of identifying all three types of VWD. Patients with borderline results should be tested two to three times over a three month period. Once a patient is diagnosed with VWD, further testing such as vWF multimer analysis and ristocetininduced platelet aggregation (RIPA) may need to be performed to determine the subtype. Multimer analysis evaluates the structure of the vWF, and RIPA measures how much ristocetin is required to cause the clumping of platelets in a blood sample. The vWF multimer analysis is able to differentiate people with a structurally normal vWF (type 1) from people with a structurally abnormal vWF (type 2) and is often able to identify the subtype of patients with type 2 VWD. People with type 1 VWD usually have normal to decreased RIPA concentrations. Depending on the subtype, patients with type 2 VWD either have increased or decreased RIPA. RIPA is usually absent and the multimer analysis shows undetectable vWF in people with type 3 VWD. In some cases DNA testing can be a valuable adjunct to biochemical testing. The detection of gene alteration(s) can confirm a diagnosis and can determine the type and subtype of VWD. It can also help to facilitate prenatal testing and testing of other family members. Unfortunately, as of 2001, many people with VWD possess DNA changes that are not detectable through DNA testing. A person who has a mother, father, or sibling diagnosed GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

with VWD should undergo biochemical testing for VWD. If the relative with VWD possesses a detectable gene change, then DNA testing should also be considered. Prenatal testing If one parent has been diagnosed with an autosomal dominant form of VWD or both parents are carriers for an autosomal recessive form of VWD, then prenatal testing can be considered. If the parent with an autosomal dominant form of VWD possesses a detectable gene change or both parents who are carriers for an autosomal recessive form of VWD possess detectable mutations, then DNA testing of their fetus would be available. DNA testing can be performed through amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. If the DNA change in the parent(s) is unknown then prenatal testing can sometimes be performed through biochemical testing of blood obtained from the fetal umbilical cord, which is less accurate and is associated with a higher risk of pregnancy loss.

Treatment VWD is most commonly treated by replacement of vWF through the administration of blood products that contain vWF or through treatment with desmopressin (DDAVP, 1-deamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin). DDAVP functions by increasing the amount of factor VIII and vWF in the bloodstream. Treatment with blood products or DDAVP may be started in response to uncontrollable bleeding or may be administered prior to procedures such as surgeries or dental work. The type of treatment chosen depends on the type of VWD and a patient’s response to a preliminary treatment trial. Treatment with desmopressin DDAVP is the most common treatment for people with type 1 VWD. About 80% of people with type 1 VWD respond to DDAVP therapy. Treatment with DDAVP can also be used to treat some people with type 2 VWD. Patients with Type 2B VWD should not be treated with this medication since DDAVP can induce dangerous platelet clumping. Type 3 VWD should not be treated with DDAVP since this medication does not increase the level of vWF in type 3 patients. DDAVP should only be used in people who have been shown to be responsive through a pre-treatment trial transfusion with this medication. DDAVP can be administered intravenously or through a nasal inhaler. DDAVP has relatively few side effects although some people may experience facial flushing, tingling sensations, and headaches after treatment with this medication. Often treatment with this 3533

von Willebrand disease

and bleeding from the mucous membranes such as the nose, gums and gastrointestinal tract. Testing for an individual with suspected VWD often includes the measurement of:

von Willebrand disease

KEY TERMS Amniocentesis—A procedure performed at 16-18 weeks of pregnancy in which a needle is inserted through a woman’s abdomen into her uterus to draw out a small sample of the amniotic fluid from around the baby. Either the fluid itself or cells from the fluid can be used for a variety of tests to obtain information about genetic disorders and other medical conditions in the fetus.

Desmopressin (DDAVP)—A drug used in the treatment of von Willebrand’s disease.

Autosomal dominant—A pattern of genetic inheritance where only one abnormal gene is needed to display the trait or disease.

Endothelial cells—The cells lining the inner walls of the blood vessels.

Autosomal recessive—A pattern of genetic inheritance where two abnormal genes are needed to display the trait or disease. Biochemical testing—Measuring the amount or activity of a particular enzyme or protein in a sample of blood or urine or other tissue from the body. Carrier—A person who possesses a gene for an abnormal trait without showing signs of the disorder. The person may pass the abnormal gene on to offspring. Chorionic villus sampling (CVS)—A procedure used for prenatal diagnosis at 10-12 weeks gestation. Under ultrasound guidance a needle is inserted either through the mother’s vagina or abdominal wall and a sample of cells is collected from around the early embryo. These cells are then tested for chromosome abnormalities or other genetic diseases.

Diagnostic testing—Testing performed to determine if someone is affected with a particular disease. DNA testing—Analysis of DNA (the genetic component of cells) in order to determine changes in genes that may indicate a specific disorder.

Factor VIII—A protein involved in blood clotting that requires vWF for stability and long-term survival in the bloodstream. Gene—A building block of inheritance, which contains the instructions for the production of a particular protein, and is made up of a molecular sequence found on a section of DNA. Each gene is found on a precise location on a chromosome. Mutation—A permanent change in the genetic material that may alter a trait or characteristic of an individual, or manifest as disease, and can be transmitted to offspring. Platelets—Small disc-shaped structures that circulate in the blood stream and participate in blood clotting. Prenatal testing—Testing for a disease such as a genetic condition in an unborn baby.

Chromosome—A microscopic thread-like structure found within each cell of the body and consists of a complex of proteins and DNA. Humans have 46 chromosomes arranged into 23 pairs. Changes in either the total number of chromosomes or their shape and size (structure) may lead to physical or mental abnormalities.

Protein—Important building blocks of the body, composed of amino acids, involved in the formation of body structures and controlling the basic functions of the human body.

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)—The genetic material in cells that holds the inherited instructions for growth, development, and cellular functioning.

von Willebrand factor (vWF)—A protein found in the blood that is involved in the process of blood clotting.

medication is only required prior to invasive surgeries or dental procedures. Treatment with blood products Patients who are unable to tolerate or are unresponsive to drug-based treatments are treated with concentrat3534

Skin hematoma—Blood from a broken blood vessel that has accumulated under the skin.

ed factor VIII obtained from blood products. Not all factor VIII concentrates can be used since some do not contain enough vWF. The concentrate is treated to kill most viruses, although caution should be used since not all types of viruses are destroyed. If the factor VIII concentrates are unable to manage a severe bleeding episode, then blood products called cryoprecipitates, which conGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Other treatments and precautions Medications called fibrinolytic inhibitors can be helpful in the control of intestinal, mouth, and nose bleeding. Estrogens such as are found in oral contraceptives increase the synthesis of vWF and can sometimes be used in the long-term treatment of women with mild to moderate VWD. Estrogens are also sometimes used prior to surgery in women with type 1 VWD. Some topical agents are available to treat nose and mouth bleeds. Patients with VWD should avoid taking aspirin, which can increase their susceptibility to bleeding and people with severe forms of VWD should avoid activities that increase their risk of injury such as contact sports.

National Hemophilia Foundation. Soho Building, 110 Greene Street, Suite 406, New York, NY 10012. (212) 219-8180. . OTHER

Mannucci, Pier “Desmopressin (DDAVP) in the Treatment of Bleeding Disorders: The First Twenty Years.” The Treatment of Hemophilia Monograph Series. No. 11 (1998). . Paper, Renee. “Gynecological Complications in Women with Bleeding Disorders.” The Treatment of Hemophilia Monograph Series. No. 5 (1996). . World Federation of Hemophilia. “Protocols for the Treatment of Hemophilia and von Willebrand Disease.” No. 14 (1998). .

Lisa Maria Andres, MS, CGC

Prognosis The prognosis for VWD disease is generally fairly good and most individuals have a normal lifespan. The prognosis can depend, however on accurate diagnosis and appropriate medical treatment. Resources BOOKS

Handin, Robert I. “Disorders of the Platelet and Vessel Wall.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, edited by Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998. Sadler, J.E. “Von Willebrand Disease.” In The Metabolic and Molecular Basis of Inherited Disease, edited by C.R. Scriver, et al. New York: McGraw Hill, 1995. PERIODICALS

Ginsburg, David. “Molecular Genetics of von Willebrand Disease.” Thrombosis and Haemostasis 82, no. 2 (1999): 585–591. Nichols, William C., and David Ginsburg. “Von Willebrand’s Disease.” Medicine 76 (Jan. 1997): 1. Voelker, Rebecca. “New Focus on von Willebrand’s Disease.” Journal of the American Medical Association 278 (October 8, 1997): 1137. ORGANIZATIONS

Canadian Hemophilia Society. 625 President Kennedy, Suite 1210, Montreal, QUE H3A 1K2. Canada (514) 848-0503. Fax: (514) 848-9661. chs@hemophilia.ca. . Haemophelia Society—Von Willebrand Support Services. Chesterfield House, 385 Euston Road, London, NW1 3AU. UK 0171 380 0600. Fax: 0171 387 8220. melissa@haemophilia-soc.demon.co.uk. . GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

VSD see Ventricular septal defect

Vulvar cancer Definition Vulvar cancer refers to an abnormal, cancerous growth in the external female genitalia.

Description Vulvar cancer is a rare disease that occurs mainly in elderly women. The vulva refers to the external female genitalia, which includes the labia, the opening of the vagina, the clitoris, and the space between the vagina and anus (perineum). There are two pairs of labia (a Latin term meaning lips). The labia meet to protect the openings of the vagina and the tube that connects to the bladder (urethra). The outer, most prominent folds of skin are called labia majora, and the smaller, inner skin folds are called labia minora. Vulvar cancer can affect any part of the female genitalia, but usually affects the labia. Approximately 70% of vulvar cancers involve the labia (usually the labia majora), 15% to 20% involve the clitoris, and 15% to 20% involve the perineum. For approximately 5% of the cases, the cancer is present at more than one location. For approximately 10% of the cases, so much of the vulva is affected by cancer that the original location cannot be determined. Vulvar cancer 3535

Vulvar cancer

tain concentrated amounts of vWF, or platelet concentrates should be considered. Caution should be used when treating with these blood products since they are not treated to kill viruses.

Vulvar cancer

can spread to nearby structures including the anus, vagina, and urethra. Most vulvar cancers are squamous cell carcinomas. Squamous cells are the main cell type of the skin. Squamous cell carcinoma often begins at the edges of the labia majora or labia minora or the area around the vagina. This type of cancer is usually slow-growing and may begin with a precancerous condition referred to as vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN), or dysplasia. This means that precancerous cells are present in the surface layer of skin. Other, less common types of vulvar cancer are melanoma, basal cell carcinoma, adenocarcinomas, Paget’s disease of the vulva, and tumors of the connective tissue under the skin. Melanoma, a cancer that develops from the cells that produce the pigment that determines the skin’s color, can occur anywhere on the skin, including the vulva. Melanoma is the second most common type of vulvar cancer, and accounts for 5% to 10% of the cases. Half of all vulvar melanomas involve the labia majora. Basal cell carcinoma, which is the most common type of cancer that occurs on parts of the skin exposed to the sun, very rarely occurs on the vulva. Adenocarcinomas develop from glands, including the glands at the opening of the vagina (Bartholin’s glands) that produce a mucus-like lubricating fluid. Vulvar cancer is most common in women over 50 years of age. The median age at diagnosis is 65 to 70 years old. Additional risk factors for vulvar cancer include having multiple sexual partners, cervical cancer, and the presence of chronic vaginal and vulvar inflammations. This type of cancer is often associated with sexually transmitted diseases. Vulvar cancer is most common in women who are between the ages of 65 and 75 years. In the United States there are approximately 3,000 new cases of vulvar cancer diagnosed each year. Vulvar cancer accounts for only 1% of all cancers in women. Approximately 5% of all gynecologic cancers occur on the vulva. For unknown reasons, the incidence of vulvar cancer seems to be rising.

Causes and symptoms Cancer is caused when the normal mechanisms that control cell growth become disturbed, causing the cells to continually grow without stopping. This is usually the result of damage to the DNA in the cell. Although the cause of vulvar cancer is unknown, studies have identified several risk factors for vulvar cancer. These include: • Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN). This abnormal growth of the surface cells of the vulva can sometimes progress to cancer. 3536

• Infection with human papillomavirus (HPV). This virus is sexually transmitted and can cause genital warts. Although HPV DNA can be detected in most cases of vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia, it is detected in fewer than half of all cases of vulvar cancer. Therefore, the link between HPV infection and vulvar cancer is unclear. As of 2001, it is theorized that two classes of vulvar cancer exist: one that is associated with HPV infection and one that is not. • Herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV2). This sexually transmitted virus is also associated with increased risk for vulvar cancer. • Cigarette smoking. Smoking in combination with infection by HPV or HSV2 was found to be a particularly strong risk factor for vulvar cancer. • Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). This virus, which causes AIDS, decreases the body’s immune ability, leaving it vulnerable to a variety of diseases, including vulvar cancer. • Chronic vulvar inflammation. Long term irritation and inflammation of the vulva and vagina, which may be caused by poor hygiene, can increase the risk of vulvar cancer. • Abnormal Pap smears. Women who have had abnormal Pap smears are at an increased risk of developing vulvar cancer. • Chronic immunosuppression. Women who have had long-term suppression of their immune system caused by disease (such as certain cancers) or medication (such as those taken after organ transplantation) have an increased risk of developing vulvar cancer. The hallmark symptom of vulvar cancer is itching (pruritus), which is experienced by 90% of the women afflicted by this cancer. The cancerous lesion is readily visible. Unfortunately, because of embarrassment or denial, it is not uncommon for women to delay medical assessment of vulvar abnormalities. Any abnormalities should be reported to a gynecologist. If squamous cell vulvar cancer is present, it may appear as a raised red, pink, or white bump (nodule). It is often accompanied by pain, bleeding, vaginal discharge, and painful urination. Malignant melanoma of the vulva usually appears as a pigmented, ulcerated growth. Other types of vulvar cancer may appear as a distinct mass of tissue, sore and scaly areas, or cauliflower-like growths that look like warts.

Diagnosis A gynecological examination will be used to observe the suspected area. During this examination, the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The diagnosis for vulvar cancer will determine how advanced the cancer is and how much it has spread. This is determined by the size of the tumor and how deep it has invaded the surrounding tissue and organs, such as the lymph nodes. It will also be determined if the cancer has metastasized, or spread to other organs. Tests used to determine the extent of the cancer include x ray and computed tomography scan (CT scan). Endoscopic examination of the bladder (cystoscopy) and/or rectum (proctoscopy) may be performed if it is suspected that the cancer has spread to these organs.

Treatment Clinical staging The International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) has adopted a surgical staging system for vulvar cancer. The stage of cancer is determined after surgery. The previous clinical staging system for vulvar cancer is no longer used. Vulvar cancer is categorized into five stages (0, I, II, III, and IV) which may be further subdivided (A and B) based on the depth or spread of cancerous tissue. The FIGO stages for vulvar cancer are: • Stage 0. Vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia. • Stage I. Cancer is confined to the vulva and perineum. The lesion is less than 2 cm (about 0.8 in) in size. • Stage II. Cancer is confined to the vulva and perineum. The lesion is larger than 2 cm (larger than 0.8 in) in size. • Stage III. Cancer has spread to the vagina, urethra, anus, and/or the lymph nodes in the groin (inguinofemoral). • Stage IV. Cancer has spread to the bladder, bowel, pelvic bone, pelvic lymph nodes, and/or other parts of the body. Treatments Treatment for vulvar cancer will depend on its stage and the patient’s general state of health. Surgery is the mainstay of treatment for most cases of vulvar cancer. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

SURGERY. The primary treatment for stage I and stage II vulvar cancer is surgery to remove the cancerous lesion and possibly the inguinofemoral lymph nodes. Removal of the lesion may be done by laser, to burn off a minimal amount of tissue, or by scalpel (local excision), to remove more of the tissue. The choice will depend on the severity of the cancer. If a large area of the vulva is removed, it is called a vulvectomy. Radical vulvectomy removes the entire vulva. A vulvectomy may require skin grafts from other areas of the body to cover the wound and make an artificial vulva. Because of the significant morbidity and the psychosexual consequences of radical vulvectomy, there is a trend toward minimizing the extent of cancer excision. The specific inguinofemoral lymph node that would receive lymph fluid from the cancerous lesion, known as the sentinel node, may be exposed for examination (lymph node dissection) or removed (lymphadenectomy), especially in cases in which the cancerous lesion has invaded to a depth of more than 1 mm. Surgery may also be followed by chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy to kill additional cancer cells.

Surgical treatment of stage III and stage IV vulvar cancer is much more complex. Extensive surgery would be necessary to completely remove the cancerous tissue. Surgery would involve excision of pelvic organs (pelvic exenteration), radical vulvectomy, and lymphadenectomy. Because this extensive surgery comes with a substantial risk of complications, it may be possible to treat advanced vulvar cancer with minimal surgery by using radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy as additional treatment (adjuvant therapy). An intraoperative technique that is used to identify the sentinel node in breast cancer and melanoma is being applied to vulvar cancer. This technique, called lymphoscintigraphy, is performed during surgical treatment of vulvar cancer and allows the surgeon to immediately identify the sentinel node. A radioactive compound (technetium 99m sulfur colloid) is injected into the cancerous lesion approximately two hours prior to surgery. This injection causes little discomfort, so local anesthesia is not required. During surgery, a radioactivity detector is used to locate the sentinel node and any other nodes to which cancer has spread. Though still in the experimental stage, vulvar lymphoscintigraphy shows promise in reducing morbidity and hospital length of stay. The most common complication of vulvectomy is the development of a tumor-like collection of clear liquid (wound seroma). Other surgical complications include urinary tract infection, wound infection, temporary nerve injury, fluid accumulation (edema) in the legs, urinary incontinence, falling or sinking of the genitals (genital prolapse), and blood clots (thrombus). 3537

Vulvar cancer

physician may use a special magnifying instrument called a colposcope to view the area better. Additionally, the area may be treated with a dilute solution of acetic acid, which causes some abnormal areas to turn white, making them easier to see. During this examination, if any area is suspected of being abnormal, a tissue sample (biopsy) will be taken. The biopsy can be performed in the doctor’s office with the use of local anesthetic. A wedge-shaped piece of tissue, which contains the suspect lesion with some surrounding normal skin and the underlying skin layers and connective tissue, will be removed. Small lesions will be removed in their entirety (excisional biopsy). The diagnosis of cancer depends on a microscopic analysis of this tissue by a pathologist.

Vulvar cancer

KEY TERMS Adjuvant therapy—A treatment that is intended to aid primary treatment. Adjuvant treatments for vulvar cancer are radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Biopsy—Removal of a small piece of tissue for microscopic examination. This is done under local anesthesia and removed by either using a scalpel or a punch, which removes a small cylindrical portion of tissue. Colposcope—An instrument used for examination of the vagina and cervix. Part of the instrument includes a magnifying lens for better visualization. Metastasis—The movement of cancer cells from one area of the body to another. This occurs through the blood vessels or the lymph vessels. Pelvic exenteration—Surgical removal of the organs of the true pelvis which includes the uterus, vagina, and cervix. Sentinel lymph node—The first lymph node to receive lymph fluid from a tumor. If the sentinel node is cancer-free, then it is likely that the cancerous cells have not metastasized.

RADIATION THERAPY. Radiation therapy uses highenergy radiation from x rays and gamma rays to kill the cancer cells. The skin in the treated area may become red and dry and may take as long as a year to return to normal. Fatigue, upset stomach, diarrhea, and nausea are also common complaints of women having radiation therapy. Radiation therapy in the pelvic area may cause the vagina to become narrow as scar tissue forms. This phenomenon, known as vaginal stenosis, makes intercourse painful. CHEMOTHERAPY. Chemotherapy uses anticancer drugs to kill the cancer cells. The drugs are given by mouth (orally) or intravenously. They enter the bloodstream and can travel to all parts of the body to kill cancer cells. Generally, a combination of drugs is given because it is more effective than a single drug in treating cancer. The side effects of chemotherapy are significant and include stomach upset, vomiting, appetite loss, hair loss, mouth or vaginal sores, fatigue, menstrual cycle changes, and premature menopause. There is also an increased chance of infections.

Alternative treatment Although alternative and complementary therapies are used by many cancer patients, very few controlled 3538

studies on the effectiveness of such therapies exist. Mind-body techniques such as prayer, biofeedback, visualization, meditation, and yoga have not shown any effect in reducing cancer but can reduce stress and lessen some of the side effects of cancer treatments. Clinical studies of hydrazine sulfate found that it had no effect on cancer and even worsened the health and well- being of the study subjects. One clinical study of the drug amygdalin (Laetrile) found that it had no effect on cancer. Laetrile can be toxic and has caused death. Shark cartilage, although highly touted as an effective cancer treatment, is an improbable therapy that has not been the subject of clinical study. The American Cancer Society has found that the “metabolic diets” pose serious risk to the patient. The effectiveness of the macrobiotic, Gerson, and Kelley diets and the Manner metabolic therapy has not been scientifically proven. The FDA was unable to substantiate the anticancer claims made about the popular Cancell treatment. There is no evidence for the effectiveness of most over-the-counter herbal cancer remedies. However, some herbals have shown an anticancer effect. As shown in clinical studies, Polysaccharide krestin, from the mushroom Coriolus versicolor, has significant effectiveness against cancer. In a small study, the green alga Chlorella pyrenoidosa has been shown to have anticancer activity. In a few small studies, evening primrose oil has shown some benefit in the treatment of cancer.

Prognosis Factors that are correlated with disease outcome include the diameter and depth of the cancerous lesion, involvement of local lymph nodes, cell type, HPV status, and age of the patient. Vulvar cancers that are HPV positive have a better prognosis than those that are HPV negative. The 5-year survival rate is 98% for stage I vulvar cancer and 87% for stage II vulvar cancer. The survival rate drops steadily as the number of affected lymph nodes increases. The survival rate is 75% for patients with one or two, 36% for those with three or four, and 24% for those with five or six involved lymph nodes. The previous statistics were obtained from studies of patients who received surgical treatment only and cannot be used to determine survival rates when adjuvant therapy is employed. Vulvar cancer can spread locally to encompass the anus, vagina, and urethra. Because of the anatomy of the vulva, it is not uncommon for the cancer to spread to the local lymph nodes. Advanced stages of vulvar cancer can affect the pelvic bone. The lungs are the most common site for vulvar cancer metastasis. Metastasis through the blood (hematogenous spread) is uncommon. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The risk of vulvar cancer can be decreased by avoiding risk factors, most of which involve lifestyle choices. Specifically, to reduce the risk of vulvar cancer, women should not smoke and should refrain from engaging in unsafe sexual behavior. Good hygiene of the genital area to prevent infection and inflammation may also reduce the risk of vulvar cancer. Because vulvar cancer is highly curable in its early stages, women should consult a physician as soon as a vulvar abnormality is detected. Regular gynecological examinations are necessary to detect precancerous conditions that can be treated before the cancer becomes invasive. Because some vulvar cancer is a type of skin cancer, the American Cancer Society also recommends selfexamination of the vulva using a mirror. If moles are present in the genital area, women should employ the ABCD rule:

Cancer Research Institute, National Headquarters. 681 Fifth Ave., New York, NY 10022. (800) 992-2623. . Gynecologic Cancer Foundation. 401 N. Michigan Ave., Chicago, IL 60611. (800) 444-4441 or (312) 644-6610. . National Institutes of Health. National Cancer Institute. 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20982. (800) 4-CANCER. . OTHER

Cancer Care News. 3 July 2001 . Quackwatch, Questionable Cancer Therapies. 3 July 2001 .

Cindy L. Jones, Ph.D. Belinda Rowland, Ph.D.

Vulvitis see Vulvovaginitis

• Asymmetry. A cancerous mole may have two halves of unequal size. • Border irregularity. A cancerous mole may have ragged or notched edges. • Color. A cancerous mole may have variations in color. • Diameter. A cancerous mole may have a diameter wider than 6 mm (1/4 in). Resources BOOKS

American Cancer Society’s Guide to Complementary and Alternative Cancer Methods. Bruss, Katherine, Christina Salter, and Esmeralda Galan, eds. Atlanta: American Cancer Society, 2000. Eifel, Patricia, Jonathan Berrek, and James Thigpen. “Cancer of the Cervix, Vagina, and Vulva.” In Cancer: Principles & Practice of Oncology. DeVita, Vincent, Samuel Hellman, and Steven Rosenberg, eds. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001. Garcia, Agustin, and J. Tate Thigpen. “Tumors of the Vulva and Vagina.” In Textbook of Uncommon Cancer. Raghavan, D., M. Brecher, D. Johnson, N. Meropol, P. Moots, and J. Thigpen, eds. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 1999. Primack, Aron. “Complementary/Alternative Therapies in the Prevention and Treatment of Cancer.” In Complementary/ Alternative Medicine: An Evidence- Based Approach. Spencer, John, and Joseph Jacobs. St. Louis: Mosby, 1999. PERIODICALS

Grendys, Edward, and James Fiorica. “Innovations in the Management of Vulvar Carcinoma.” Current Opinion in Obstetrics and Gynecology 12 (February 2000): 15-20. ORGANIZATIONS

American Cancer Society. 1599 Clifton Rd. NE, Atlanta, GA 30329. (800) ACS-2345. . GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Vulvovaginitis Definition Inflammation of the vagina and vulva most often caused by a bacterial, fungal, or parasitic infection.

Description Vulvovaginitis, vulvitis, and vaginitis are general terms that refer to the inflammation of the vagina and/or vulva (the external genital organs of a woman).These conditions can be caused by bacterial, fungal, or parasitic infections. Also, vulvovaginitis can be caused by low estrogen levels (called “atrophic vaginitis”) or any type of allergic or irritation response from things such as spermicidal products, condoms, soaps, and bubble bath. In general, vulvovaginitis causes vaginal discharge, irritation, and itching. One of the most common reasons why women visit their doctor is because of a change in vaginal discharge. It is completely normal for a woman to have a vaginal discharge, the amount and consistency of which varies during the course of the menstrual cycle. Each of the three most common types of vulvovaginitis will be described separately. Bacterial vaginosis Bacterial vaginosis is the most common cause of vaginitis during the childbearing years. Forty percent to 50% of vaginitis cases are caused by bacterial vaginosis. The occurrence of bacterial vaginosis is difficult to determine but studies have proposed that 10% to 41% of 3539

Vulvovaginitis

Prevention

Vulvovaginitis

women have had it at least once. The occurrence of bacterial vaginosis in the United States is highest among African-American women and women who have had multiple sexual partners and lowest among Asian women and women with no history of sexual contact with men. Bacterial vaginosis is not considered a sexually transmitted disease although it can be acquired by sexual intercourse. Bacterial vaginosis is not caused by a particular organism but is a change in the balance of normal vaginal bacteria. Ninety percent of the bacteria found in a healthy vagina belong to the Lactobacillus family. For unknown reasons, there is a shift in the bacterial population that results in overgrowth of other bacteria. Patients suffering from bacterial vaginosis have very high numbers of bacteria such as Gardnerella vaginalis, Mycoplasmahominis, Bacteroides species, and Mobiluncus species. These bacteria can be found at numbers 100 to 1000 times greater than found in the healthy vagina. In contrast, Lactobacillus bacteria are in very low numbers or completely absent from the vagina of women with bacterial vaginosis. Candida vulvovaginitis Candida vulvovaginitis also has been called “vulvovaginal candidiasis,” “candidal vaginitis,” “monilial infection,” or “vaginal yeast infection.” Twenty to 25% of the vaginitis cases are candida vulvovaginitis. It has been estimated that about 75% of all women get a vaginal yeast infection at least once. In 80-90% of the cases, candida vulvovaginitis is caused by an overgrowth of the yeast Candida albicans. The remaining cases are caused by other species of Candida. It is not known what causes the yeast overgrowth. However, antibiotics can inadvertently kill normal bacteria in the vagina and cause an overgrowth of Candida. Candida vulvovaginitis is not considered a sexually transmitted disease because Candida species are commonly found in the healthy vagina. It is a rare disease in girls before puberty and celibate women. Vaginal yeast infections tend to occur more frequently in women who are pregnant, diabetic and not controlling their disease, taking birth control pills, or taking antibiotics. Some women have four or more attacks per year which is called “recurrent vaginal candidiasis.” Trichomoniasis Trichomoniasis, which is sometimes called “trich,” accounts for 15-20% of the cases of vaginitis. It is estimated that two million to three million American women get trichomoniasis each year. Unlike the previous two causes of vulvovaginitis, trichomoniasis is a sexually transmitted disease. This means that the disease is passed 3540

from person-to-person only by sexual contact. Trichomoniasis occurs in both men and women and is caused by an infection with the single-celled parasite Trichomonas vaginalis. Infection with Trichomonas vaginalis is frequently associated with other sexually transmitted diseases and assists the spread of the AIDS virus.

Causes and symptoms Vulvovaginitis is most often caused by a bacterial, fungal, or parasitic infection as described above. Other microorganisms may cause vulvovaginitis, or it may be caused by allergic reaction, irritation, injury, low estrogen levels, and certain diseases. Risk factors for bacterial vaginosis include using an intrauterine device (IUD), nonwhite race, prior pregnancy, first sexual activity at an early age, having multiple sexual partners, and having a history of sexually transmitted diseases. Persons at an increased risk for candida vulvovaginitis include those who have had previous candida infections, frequent sexual intercourse, use birth control pills, have AIDS, are pregnant, are taking antibiotics or corticosteroids, are diabetic, use douches, use perfumed feminine hygiene sprays, wear tight clothing, or use vaginal sponges or an IUD. The typical symptoms of vulvovaginitis are: vaginal discharge, itching, and irritation. Women may have few or no symptoms, while others may have pronounced symptoms. The main symptom of bacterial vaginosis is a fishy-smelling, thin, milky-white or gray vaginal discharge but itching and burning may also be present. The fishy smell is stronger after sexual intercourse. The symptoms of candida vulvovaginitis are itching, soreness, painful sexual intercourse, and a thick, curdy, white (like cottage cheese) vaginal discharge. Trichomoniasis symptoms are: painful urination, painful sexual intercourse, and a yellow-green to gray, foul smelling, sometimes frothy, vaginal discharge.

Diagnosis Vulvovaginitis can be diagnosed and treated by a nurse practitioner or physician. Most insurance companies cover the costs of diagnosis and treatment. To diagnose vulvovaginitis, the doctor will examine the vagina (using a speculum to keep the vagina open) and take a sample of the vaginal discharge for tests and microscopic analysis. Laboratory culture results should be available in two to three days but the microscopic examination of the vaginal discharge may be immediately performed in the doctor’s office. Diagnosis may be difficult because there are many different causes of vulvovaginitis. Women who think that they have vulvovaginitis should always visit their doctor to get an accurate diagnosis. Many women assume that they have a yeast infection and GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

There are four signs that indicate that a woman has bacterial vaginosis. These signs (called “Amsel’s criteria”) are: a thin, milky white discharge that clings to the walls of the vagina, presence of a fishy odor, a vaginal pH of greater than 4.5, and the presence of “clue cells” in the vagina. Clue cells are vaginal cells that are covered with small bacteria. A diagnosis of candida vulvovaginitis is made after finding a normal vaginal pH (4 to 4.5) and the presence of many yeast cells in the sample of vaginal discharge or growth of yeast on laboratory media. A trichomoniasis diagnosis is made when the parasites are found in the vaginal discharge either by microscopic examination or in laboratory cultures.

Treatment Both bacterial vaginosis and trichomoniasis require prescription medication for treatment. Candida vulvovaginitis may be treated with either prescription or overthe-counter medicines. It is not advisable to take overthe-counter vaginal yeast infection medicines if one does not have a yeast infection. An Institute of Epidemiological Research survey of 390 gynecologists found that 44% of the women who were diagnosed with bacterial vaginosis had first treated themselves with over-the-counter yeast infection medications. Bacterial vaginosis should be treated daily for one week with the antibiotics metronidazole (Flagyl, Protostat) or clindamycin (Cleocin) either as pills taken orally or in a gel or cream form put into the vagina. Trichomoniasis is treated with either a large, single dose of metronidazole or with a smaller dose taken twice daily for one week. Male sexual partners of women with trichomoniasis also must be treated. Candida vulvovaginitis is most often treated by the application of medicated gels, creams, or suppositories applied directly to the vagina. The antifungal drugs used to treat candida vulvovaginitis include oral fluconazole (Diflucan), butoconazole (Femstat), clotrimazole (Gynelotrimin, Mycelex), miconazole (Monistat), and ticonazole (Vagistat). Most require only one or a few days of therapy to be effective. Women who have recurrent candida infections may receive treatment for several weeks and then some form of a long-term preventative treatment.

Alternative treatment One of the primary focuses of alternative treatment for vaginal conditions including vulvovaginitis is rebalancing the normal vaginal flora. To assist with this rebalancing, Lactobacillus acidophilus and L. bifidus are recommended, either taken internally or introduced directly GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Parasite—An animal or plant that can only survive by living inside or upon another animal or plant. Vulva—The external genital organs of a woman, including the outer and inner lips, clitoris, and opening of the vagina.

into the vagina. Garlic (Allium sativum), both taken internally and inserted into the vagina (a peeled whole clove wrapped in gauze), may be helpful due to its antibacterial and antifungal actions. A variety of other herbs can be used as douches or in suppository form to help treat acute flare-ups of vaginal symptoms. For example a douche made by steeping 1–2 tsp. of calendula (Calendula officinalis) in boiling water (let the water cool before using) may help reduce inflammation. A boric acid douche can help to acidify the vaginal pH so that unwanted bacteria cannot survive and multiply. For atrophic vaginitis, especially in menopausal women, topical application of progesterone cream can help with the thinning of the tissue so that symptoms can abate. Dietary modification and nutritional supplementation may also be helpful in the treatment of vulvovaginitis. Antioxidant vitamins, including A, C, and E, as well as B complex vitamins, and vitamin D, are recommended. Foods to avoid include cheese, alcohol, chocolate, soy sauce, sugar, vinegar, fruits, and any fermented foods. Wearing cotton underwear and loose fitting clothes and avoiding panty hose can help keep the vagina cool and dry, thus helping to prevent some forms of vulvovaginitis. Cases of chronic vulvovaginitis should be addressed on systemic level by an alternative practitioner.

Prognosis Vulvovaginitis is a disease with minor symptoms and most women respond well to medications. It is believed that certain vaginal infections, if left untreated, can lead to more serious conditions such as pelvic inflammatory disease, endometritis, postsurgical infections, and spread of the AIDS virus.

Prevention Vaginal infections may be prevented by following these suggestions: • Over-the-counter yeast infection treatments should not be taken unless the woman had been diagnosed with candidiasis before and recognizes the symptoms. 3541

Vulvovaginitis

take over-the-counter medicines without first consulting their doctors.

Vulvovaginitis

• Douching should be avoided because it may disturb the balance of organisms in the vagina and may spread them higher into the reproductive system. • Thoroughly dry oneself after bathing and remove a wet bathing suit promptly. • Avoid wearing tight clothing and wear cotton underwear. • Clean diaphragms, cervical caps, and spermicide applicators after use. Use condoms to avoid sexually transmitted disease. • After a bowel movement, wipe from front to back to avoid spreading intestinal bacteria to the vagina.

3542

Resources PERIODICALS

Sobel, Jack D. “Vaginitis.” The New England Journal of Medicine 337 (Dec. 1997): 1896-1903. ORGANIZATIONS

National Vaginitis Association. 117 South Cook St., Suite 315, Barrington, IL 60010. (800) 909-8745. . . OTHER

“Women’s Health STD Information Center.” JAMA. .

Belinda Rowland, PhD

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

W Waldenström disease see Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia

WM most often affects males over the age of 65. Frequently, this disease produces no symptoms and does not require treatment. It has not been studied as extensively as other types of lymphoma. The lymphatic system

Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia Definition Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia is a rare, chronic cancer of the immune system that is characterized by hyperviscosity, or thickening, of the blood.

Description Waldenström’s (Waldenstrom, Waldenstroem’s) macroglobulinemia (WM) is a lymphoma, or cancer of the lymphatic system. It was first identified in 1944, by the Swedish physician Jan Gosta Waldenström, in patients who had a thickening of the serum, or liquid part, of the blood. Their blood serum contained a great deal of a very large molecule called a globulin. Thus, the disorder is called macroglobulinemia. Lymphomas are cancers that originate in tissues of the lymphatic system. All lymphomas other than Hodgkin’s disease, including WM, are known collectively as nonHodgkin’s lymphomas. There are 13 major types of nonHodgkin’s lymphomas, and others that are very rare. Other names that are sometimes used for WM include: lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, lymphoplasmacytic leukemia, macroglobulinemia of Waldenström, primary macroglobulinemia, Waldenström’s syndrome, Waldenström’s purpura, or hyperglobulinemic purpura. Purpura refers to purple spots on the skin, resulting from the frequent bleeding and bruising that can be a symptom of WM. WM is classified as a low-grade or indolent form of lymphoma because it is a slow-growing cancer that produces fewer symptoms than other types of lymphomas. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

The lymphatic system is part of the body’s immune system, for fighting disease, and part of the blood-producing system. It includes the lymph vessels and nodes, and the spleen, bone marrow, and thymus. The narrow lymphatic vessels carry lymphatic fluid from throughout the body. The lymph nodes are small, pea-shaped organs that filter the lymphatic fluid and trap foreign substances, including viruses, bacteria, and cancer cells. The spleen, in the upper left abdomen, removes old cells and debris from the blood. The bone marrow, the spongy tissue inside the bones, produces new blood cells. B lymphocytes or B cells are white blood cells that recognize disease-causing organisms. They circulate throughout the body in the blood and lymphatic fluid. Each B lymphocyte recognizes a specific foreign substance, or antigen. When it encounters its specific antigen, the B cell begins to divide and multiply, producing large numbers of identical (monoclonal), mature plasma cells. These plasma cells produce large amounts of antibody that are specific for the antigen. Antibodies are large proteins called immunoglobulins (Igs) that bind to and remove the specific antigen. A type of Ig, called IgM, is part of the early immune response. The IgM molecules form clusters in the bloodstream. When these IgM clusters encounter their specific antigen, usually a bacterium, they cover it so that it can be destroyed by other immune system cells. Plasma cell neoplasm WM is a type of plasma cell neoplasm or B-cell lymphoma. These are lymphomas in which certain plasma cells become abnormal, or cancerous, and begin to grow uncontrollably. In WM, the cancerous plasma cells 3543

Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia

overproduce large amounts of identical (monoclonal) IgM antibody. This IgM also is called M protein, for monoclonal or myeloma protein. Macroglobulinemia refers to the accumulation of this M protein in the serum of the blood. This large amount of M protein can cause the blood to thicken, causing hyperviscosity. The malignant plasma cells of some WM patients also produce and secrete partial immunoglobulins called light chains, or Bence-Jones proteins. The malignant plasma cells can invade various tissues, including the bone marrow, lymph nodes, and spleen, causing these tissues to swell. WM accounts for about 1-2% of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. It is estimated that it may affect about five out of every 100,000 people. It usually affects people over the age of 50, and most often develops after age 65. It is more common in men than in women. In the United States, WM is more common among Caucasians than among African Americans. The disease can run in families.

Causes and symptoms The cause of WM is not known. Many individuals with WM have no symptoms of the disease. This is known as asymptomatic macroglobulinemia. When symptoms of WM are present, they may vary greatly from one individual to the next. Hyperviscosity syndrome At least 50% of individuals with WM have hyperviscosity syndrome, an increased viscosity or thickening of the blood caused by the accumulation of IgM in the serum. Hyperviscosity can cause a slowing in the circulation through small blood vessels. This condition can lead to a variety of symptoms: • fatigue • weakness • rash • bruising

Cold weather can cause additional circulatory problems, by further thickening the blood and slowing down circulation. In some cases, the excess blood protein may precipitate out of the blood in the cold, creating particles that can block small blood vessels. This is called cryoglobulinemia. The extremities may turn white, or a patchy red and white. The hands, feet, fingers, toes, ears, and nose may feel cold, numb, or painful. Hyperviscosity may affect the brain and nervous system, leading to additional symptoms. These symptoms include: • peripheral neuropathy, caused by changes in the nerves, leading to pain or numbness in the extremities • dizziness • headaches • vision problems or loss of vision • mental confusion • poor coordination • temporary paralysis • mental changes Hyperviscosity can clog the tubules that form the filtering system of the kidneys, leading to kidney damage or kidney failure. Existing heart conditions can be aggravated by WM. In extreme cases, WM may result in heart failure. Late-stage WM also may lead to mental changes that can progress to coma. Anemia The accumulation of IgM in the blood causes an increase in the volume of the blood plasma. This effectively dilutes out the red blood cells and other blood components. The lowered concentration of red blood cells can lead to anemia and cause serious fatigue. Likewise, a deficiency in platelets (thrombocytopenia), which cause the blood to clot, can result in easy bleeding and bruising. As the cancer progresses, there may be abnormal bleeding from the gums, nose, mouth, and intestinal tract. There may be bluish discoloration of the skin. In the later stages of the disease, leukopenia, a deficiency in white blood cells, also can develop.

• nose bleeds • gastrointestinal bleeding • weight loss • night sweats • increased and recurrent infections • poor blood circulation in the extremities Poor blood circulation, or Raynaud’s phenomenon, can affect any part of the body, but particularly the fingers, toes, nose, and ears. 3544

Organ involvement In 5-10% of WM cases, the IgM may be deposited in tissues. Thus, some individuals with WM have enlargement of the lymph nodes, the spleen, and/or the liver. If Bence-Jones proteins are produced by the malignant plasma cells, they may be deposited in the kidneys. There they can plug up the tiny tubules that form the filtering system of the kidneys. This can lead to kidney damage and kidney failure. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Anemia—Any condition in which the red blood cell count is below normal.

of the proteins; followed by the detection of an antigen (such as IgM), using a specific antibody.

Antibody—Immunoglobulin produced by immune system cells that recognizes and binds to a specific foreign substance (antigen).

Immunoglobulin (Ig)—Antibody such as IgM; large protein produced by B cells that recognizes and binds to a specific antigen.

Antigen—Foreign substance that is recognized by a specific antibody.

Interferon alpha—Potent immune-defense protein; used as an anti-cancer drug.

Autosomal dominant—Genetic trait that is expressed when present on only one of a pair of non-sex-linked chromosomes.

Lymphatic system—The vessels, lymph nodes, and organs, including the bone marrow, spleen, and thymus, that produce and carry white blood cells to fight disease.

B cell (B lymphocyte)—Type of white blood cell that produces antibodies. Bence-Jones protein—Light chain of an immunoglobulin that may be overproduced in Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia; it is excreted in the urine.

Lymphoma—Cancer that originates in lymphatic tissue. M protein—Monoclonal or myeloma protein; IgM that is overproduced in Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia and accumulates in the blood and urine.

Biopsy—Removal of a small sample of tissue for examination under a microscope; used in the diagnosis of cancer.

Monoclonal—Identical cells or proteins; cells (clones) derived from a single, genetically-distinct cell, or proteins produced by these cells.

Cryoglobulinemia—Condition in which protein in the blood forms particles in the cold, blocking blood vessels and leading to pain and numbness of the extremities.

Plasma cell—Type of white blood cell that produces antibodies; derived from an antigen-specific B cell.

Hyperviscosity—Thick, viscous blood, caused by the accumulation of large proteins, such as immunoglobulins, in the serum. Immunoelectrophoresis—Use of an electrical field to separate proteins in a mixture (such as blood or urine), on the basis of the size and electrical charge

Diagnosis Since many individuals with WM have no symptoms, the initial diagnosis may result from blood tests that are performed for some other purpose. Blood cell counts may reveal low red blood cell and platelet levels. A physical examination may indicate enlargement of the lymph nodes, spleen, and/or liver. A retinal eye examination with an ophthalmoscope may show retinal veins that are enlarged or bleeding. Blood and urine tests Serum protein electrophoresis is used to measure proteins in the blood. In this laboratory procedure, serum proteins are separated in an electrical field, based GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Plasmapheresis—Plasma exchange transfusion; the separation of serum from blood cells to treat hyperviscosity of the blood. Platelet—Cell that is involved in blood clotting. Stem cell—Undifferentiated cell that retains the ability to develop into any one of numerous cell types.

on the size and electrical charge of the proteins. Serum immunoelectrophoresis uses a second antibody that reacts with IgM. A spike in the Ig fraction indicates a large amount of identical or monoclonal IgM in individuals with WM. Normal serum contains 0.7-1.6 gm per deciliter (g/dl) of Ig, with no monoclonal Ig present. At serum IgM concentrations of 3-5 g/dl, symptoms of hyperviscosity often are present. However some individuals remain asymptomatic with IgM levels as high as 9 g/dl. Urinalysis may indicate protein in the urine. A urine Bence-Jones protein test may indicate the presence of these small, partial Igs. 3545

Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia

KEY TERMS

Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia

Bone marrow Abnormal blood tests usually are followed by a bone marrow biopsy. In this procedure, a needle is inserted into a bone and a small amount of marrow is removed. Microscopic examination of the marrow may reveal elevated levels of lymphocytes and plasma cells. However, less than 5% of patients with WM have lytic bone lesions, caused by cancerous plasma cells in the bone marrow that are destroying healthy cells. Bone lesions can be detected with x rays.

Treatment Clinical staging, to define how far a cancer has spread through the body, is the common method for choosing a cancer treatment. However, there is no generally-accepted staging system for WM. There also is no generally-accepted course of treatment for WM. Treatment may not be necessary for asymptomatic macroglobulinemia. However, if IgM serum levels are very high, treatment may be initiated even in the absence of symptoms. If symptoms are present, treatment is directed at relieving symptoms and retarding the disease’s development. Of major concern is the prevention or alleviation of blood hyperviscosity. Therefore, the initial treatment depends on the viscosity of the blood at diagnosis. Hyperviscosity Plasmapheresis, or plasma exchange transfusion, is a procedure for thinning the blood. In this treatment, blood is removed and passed through a cell separator that removes the plasma, containing the IgM, from the red and white blood cells and platelets. The blood cells are transfused back into the patient, along with a plasma substitute or donated plasma. Plasmapheresis relieves many of the acute symptoms of WM. Individuals with WM may be given fluid to counter the effects of hyperviscous blood. Low blood cell counts Treatments for low blood cell levels include: • the drug Procrit to treat anemia • transfusions with packed red blood cells to treat anemia in later stages of the disease • antibiotics to treat infections caused by a deficiency in white blood cells • transfusions with blood platelets Chemotherapy Chemotherapy, the use of anti-cancer drugs, helps to slow the abnormal development of plasma cells, but 3546

does not cure WM. It can reduce the amount of IgM in the bone marrow. In particular, chemotherapy is used to treat severe hyperviscosity and anemia that are caused by WM. Chlorambucil (Leukeran), possibly in combination with prednisone, is the typical chemotherapy choice for WM. This treatment is effective in 57% of cases. These drugs are taken by mouth. Prednisone is a corticosteroid that affects many body systems. It has anti-cancer and anti-inflammatory effects and is an immune system suppressant. Other drug combinations that are used to treat WM include cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), vincristine, and prednisone, with or without doxorubicin. Fludaribine, 2-chlorodeoxyadenosine, and corticosteroids also may be used. side effects of chemotherapy may include: • mouth sores • nausea and indigestion • hair loss • increased appetite • nervousness • insomnia These side effects disappear after the chemotherapy is discontinued. The long-term management of WM usually is accomplished through a combination of plasmapheresis and chemotherapy.

Alternative treatment Biological therapy or immunotherapy, with the potent, immune system protein interferon alpha, is used to relieve the symptoms of WM. Interferon alpha works by boosting the body’s immune response. Interferon can cause flu-like symptoms, such as fever, chills, and fatigue. It also can cause digestive problems and may affect blood pressure. The drug rituximab, an antibody that is active against antibody-producing cells, is effective in about 30% of individuals with WM. Rituximab is a monoclonal antibody produced in the laboratory. Monoclonal antibody treatment may cause a an allergic reaction in some people.

Prognosis There is no cure for WM. In general, patients go into partial or complete remission following initial treatments. However the disease is not cured and follow-up treatment may be necessary. The prognosis for this cancer depends on an individual’s age, general health, and genetic (hereditary) makeGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Prevention There is no known prevention for WM. Resources

McKusick, Victor A. “Macroglobulinemia, Waldenstrom; WM.” Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man. John Hopkins University. 28 Dec. 1999. 28 June 2001. . “Multiple Myeloma and Other Plasma CellNeoplasms.” CancerNet. National Cancer Institute. Mar. 2001. 28 June 2001. . “Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma.” Cancer Resource Center. American Cancer Society. 20 Dec 1998. 28 June 2001. . Waldenstroms.com. International Waldenstrom’s Macroglobulinemia Foundation. 28 June 2001. .

BOOKS

Drum, David. Making the Chemotherapy Decision. 2nd ed. Los Angeles: Lowell House, 1996. Kyle, Robert A. “Plasma Cell Disorders”. In Cecil Textbook of Medicine, edited by J. Claude Bennett and Fred Plum. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders, 1996. Longo, Dan. L. “Plasma Cell Disorders”. In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, edited by Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998. Sutcliffe, Simon B., ed. Lymphoma and You: A Guide for Patients Living with Hodgkin’s Disease and NonHodgkin’s Lymphoma. Toronto: The Medicine Group Ltd., 1998. ORGANIZATIONS

Cure for Lymphoma Foundation. 215 Lexington Ave., New York, NY 10016. (212) 213-9595. (800)-CFL-6848. infocfl@cfl.org. . An advocacy organization; education and support programs, research grants, information on clinical trials for Hodgkin’s and non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas. International Waldenstrom’s Macroglobulinemia Foundation. 2300 Bee Ridge Road, Sarasota, FL 34239-6226. (941) 927IWMF. . Information, educational programs, support for patients and families, research support. The Leukemia and Lymphoma Society. 600 Third Ave., New York, NY 10016. (800) 955-4572. (914) 949-5213. . Information, support, and guidance for patients and health care professionals. The Lymphoma Research Foundation of America, Inc. 8800 Venice Boulevard, Suite 207, Los Angeles, CA 90034. (310) 204-7040). . Research into treatments for lymphoma; educational and emotional support programs for patients and families. OTHER

Complementary and Alternative Therapies for Leukemia, Lymphoma, Hodgkin’s Disease and Myeloma. The Leukemia and Lymphoma Society. 27 Mar. 2001. 28 June 2001. . “Macroglobulinemia of Waldenstrom.” WebMD. 1999. 14 Apr. 2001. 28 June 2001. . GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

J. Ricker Polsdorfer Margaret Alic, Ph.D.

Walleye see Strabismus

Warts Definition Warts are small, benign growths caused by a viral infection of the skin or mucous membrane. The virus infects the surface layer. The viruses that cause warts are members of the human papilloma virus (HPV) family. Warts are not cancerous but some strains of HPV, usually not associated with warts, have been linked with cancer formation. Warts are contagious from person to person and from one area of the body to another on the same person.

Description Particularly common among children, young adults, and women, warts are a problem for 7-10% of the population. There are close to 60 types of HPV that cause warts, each preferring a specific skin location. For instance, some types of HPV cause warts to grow on the skin, others cause them to grow inside the mouth, while still others cause them to grow on the genital and rectal areas. However, most can be active anywhere on the body. The virus enters through the skin and produces new warts after an incubation period of one to eight months. Warts are usually skin-colored and feel rough to the touch, but they also can be dark, flat, and smooth. Warts are passed from person to person, directly and indirectly. Some people are continually susceptible to warts, while others are more resistant to HPV and seldom get them. The virus takes hold more readily when 3547

Warts

up. Males, individuals over age 60, and those with severe anemia have the lowest survival rates. The Revised European American Lymphoma (REAL) classification system gives WM a good prognosis following treatment, with an average five-year survival rate of 50-70%. However, many people with WM live much longer, some without developing any symptoms of the disease. About 16-23% of individuals with WM die of unrelated causes.

Warts

Plantar warts are familiar to all ages groups, appearing frequently in children between the ages of 12-16. Adolescents often come into contact with a wart virus in a locker room, swimming pool area, or by walking barefooted on dirty surfaces. The blood vessels feeding them are the black dots that are visible on the wart. If left untreated, these warts can grow to an inch or more in circumference and spread into clusters of several warts. They are known to be very painful at times, the pain usually compared to the feeling of a permanent stone in the shoe particularly if the wart is on a pressure point of the foot. People with diabetes mellitus are prone to complications from plantar warts related to the development of sores or ulceration and the poor healing potential associated with diabetes. Flat warts

Cluster of warts on finger. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

the skin has been damaged in some way, which may explain why children who bite their nails tend to have warts located on their fingers. People who take a medication to suppress their immune system or are on long-term steroid use are also prone to a wart virus infection. This same is true for patients with AIDS.

Causes and symptoms The more common types of warts include: • common hand warts • foot warts • flat warts • genital warts Hand warts Common hand warts grow around the nails, on the fingers, and on the backs of hands. They appear more frequently where skin is broken, such as in areas where fingernails are bitten or hangnails picked. Foot warts Foot warts are called plantar warts because the word plantar is the medical term for the sole of the foot, the area where the wart usually appears as a single lesion or as a cluster. Plantar warts, however, do not stick up above the surface like common warts. The ball of the foot, the heel and the plantar part of the toes are the most likely locations for the warts because the skin in those areas is subject to the most weight, pressure and irritation, making a small break or crack more likely. 3548

Flat warts tend to grow in great numbers and are smaller and smoother than other warts. They can erupt anywhere, appearing more frequently on the legs of women, the faces of children, and on the areas of the face that are shaved by young adult males.

Genital warts Genital warts, also called condyloma acuminata or venereal warts, are one of the most common causes of sexually transmitted disease (STD) in this country. According to the Journal of the American Medical Association’s STD Information Center, they are contracted by sexual contact with an infected person who carries HPV and are more contagious than other warts. It is estimated that two-thirds of the people who have sexual contact with a partner with genital warts will develop the disease within three months of contact. As a result, about one million new cases of genital warts are diagnosed in the United States each year. Genital warts tend to be small flat bumps or they may be thin and tall. They are usually soft and not scaly like other warts. In women, genital warts appear on the genitalia, within the vagina, on the cervix, and around the anus or within the rectum. In men, genital warts usually appear on the tip of the penis but may also be found on the scrotum or around the anus. Genital warts can also develop in the mouth of a person who has had oral sexual contact with an infected person.

Diagnosis Patients who notice warts in their genital area should see a doctor. The doctor may be able to diagnose the warts with a simple examination. If the warts are small, the doctor may put a vinegar-like liquid on the skin, which makes the warts turn white and easier to see, and then use a magnifying glass to look for them. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Warts

Treatment Home/self treatment Many of the nonprescription wart remedies available at drug stores will remove simple warts from hands and fingers. These medications may be lotions, ointments, or plasters and work by chemically removing the skin that was affected by the wart virus. The chemicals are strong, however, and should be used with care since they can remove healthy as well as infected skin. These solutions should be avoided by diabetics and those with cardiovascular or other circulatory disorders whose skin may be insensitive and not appreciate irritation. Flat warts are best treated with topical retinoides (retinoic acid) or a gel containing salicylic acid. The acid doesn’t actually kill the wart virus, but waterlogs the skin so that the surface layer, with the virus, peels off. These products can take up to three months of treatment depending on the size and depth of the wart. Patches are also good to use. Rather than applying drops, a small pad is placed on the wart and left for 48 hours and then replaced with a new one. The patch usually contains a higher concentration of salicylic acid and may irritate the surrounding skin. If this occurs, patients should switch to a gel or stop medication for a period. To help the healing process for flat facial warts, men should shave with an electric shaver or temporarily grow a beard. Women with flat warts on areas that are shaved should use other methods to remove hair such as depilatory cream or wax. Professional treatment Physicians should be consulted if there are no signs of progress after a month of self treatment. Doctors have many ways of removing warts, including using stronger topically applied chemicals than those available in drugstores. Some of these solutions include podofilox, topical podophyllum, and trichloracetic acid (TCA). Some burning and discomfort for one or more days following treatment can be expected. Although these chemicals are effective, they may not destroy all warts completely. A second method of removal is freezing or cryosurgery on the wart using liquid nitrogen. Cryotherapy is relatively inexpensive, does not require anesthesia, and usually does not result in scarring. Although temporarily uncomfortable, it provides an effective and safe way to deliver freezing temperatures to a particular area on the skin, and healing is usually quick. Physicians may also choose to burn the wart with liquid nitrogen or numb the skin and then scrape off the wart. Another removal process is electrocautery (electric burning), destroying the wart by burning it with an electric needle. Laser surgery is also becoming a more common option for removing warts. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Seborrhoeic warts appearing on this patient’s back. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

Genital warts are the most difficult to treat. They can be removed, but the viral infection itself cannot be cured. Often, because the warts are so small, more than one treatment may be needed. The virus continues to live in the deeper skin, which is why warts often return after they have been removed. Strong chemicals may be applied as well as surgical excision with or without electrocautery. This therapy requires a small operative procedure and a local anesthetic. Laser therapy, although more expensive, is often used for treating venereal warts that are more extensive. The use of lasers which vaporize the lesion can theoretically transmit the HPV. It is not at all clear, however, if this occurs. There is no one recommended method for eliminating plantar warts. If detected early, cryotherapy is usually enough. However, they can be very resilient, requiring treatment over several months. Treatment ranges from the conservative approach of applying chemical solutions to the more aggressive option of surgery. Patients with diabetes or vascular disease are usually treated with the more conservative methods.

Alternative treatment There are a variety of alternative approaches to the treatment of warts. The suggestions described below apply to common warts and plantar warts, not to genital or cervical warts. Since genital and cervial warts are transmitted sexually, they should be treated by a physician 3549

Warts

KEY TERMS Condyloma acuminata—Another term for genital warts. Cryotherapy—Freezing with liquid nitrogen for removal. Endometritis—Inflammation of the endometrium or mucous membrane of the uterus. Epidermis—The outer layer of human skin. Human papilloma virus (HPV)—A family of viruses that causes hand warts, foot warts, flat warts and genital warts. Retinoic acid—Vitamin A1 acid which is used topically to treat acne. Salicylic acid—An agent prescribed in the treatment of hyperkeratotic skin conditions and fungal infections.

For the treatment of common or plantar warts, alternative practitioners may recommend these remedies. • Apply a paste made of vitamin C powder to the wart for one to two weeks. • Place a crushed or sliced garlic clove over the wart for seven consecutive nights while sleeping.

eral recommendation for women who have a history of genital warts is to see their doctors every six months for Pap smears to monitor any changes that may occur. For plantar warts, the treatment goal is to destroy the wart and its virus without causing much damage to healthy skin. It is not unusual for treatment to cause pain until the foot heals because of the weight put on the foot.

Prevention Genital warts can be prevented by using condoms and avoiding unprotected sex. Barrier protection will not, however, prevent the spread of wart-causing HPV to uncovered areas such as the pubis and upper thighs. Plantar warts can be prevented by wearing shoes, changing shoes daily, keeping feet clean and dry, and not ignoring skin growths and changes in the skin. Resources BOOKS

The Editors of Time-Life Books. The Medical Advisor: The Complete Guide to Alternative and Conventional Treatments. Alexandria, VA: Time Life, Inc., 1996. Moyer, Susan M., and Donna B. Fedus. The All New Medical Book of Remedies for People Over 50. Publications International, Ltd., 1995. Renner, John H. The Home Remedies Handbook. Publications International, Ltd., 1994. Stupik, Ramona. AMA Complete Guide to Women’s Health. New York: Random House, 1996.

• Soak the wart in water, put cross-hatches over it with a sterile needle, and apply drops of thuja (Thuja occidentalis) tincture onto the wart. Repeat the cross-hatching and tincture application until the wart is saturated with the tincture. Repeat several times each day for one to two weeks. (A tincture is an herbal extract made with alcohol.)

PERIODICALS

• Tape a piece of banana peel, latex side down, over the wart and leave it on overnight. Repeat nightly for one to two weeks.

ORGANIZATIONS

Because warts are caused by a virus, general immune system support can be effective in helping to keep warts from coming back after treatment or to keep them from multiplying or growing. Eating a well balanced diet high in sources of vitamins A, C, and E can help strengthen the immune system. Avoiding stress, which is believed to compromise the immune system, is also helpful.

Prognosis Even though genital warts may be removed, the virus itself continues to live. The HPV can cause tissue changes in the cervix of women with cervical infection. The gen3550

Siwek, J. “Warts on the Hands.” Washington Post, 19 Apr. 1995, 15 Smith, Trevor. “Runners Focus on Your Feet.” Running & FitNews, June 1997, 4-5. “Warts.” Mayo Clinic Health Letter (July 1993): 5. “What to do about Warts.” Consumer Reports on Health (July 1997): 81-82. American Academy of Dermatology. 930 N. Meacham Road, P.O. Box 4014, Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014. (847) 3300230. . American Academy of Family Physicians. 8880 Ward Parkway, Kansas City, MO 64114. (816) 333-9700. . American Podiatric Medical Association. 9312 Old Georgetown Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-1698. (301) 571-9200. . Dermatology College of Medicine, The University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr., Iowa City, IO 52242. (319) 356-2274. .

Ruthan Brodsky

Water pills see Diuretics GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Wechsler intelligence test Definition The Wechsler Intelligence Scales are a series of standardized tests used to evaluate cognitive abilities and intellectual abilities in children and adults.

Purpose

age 16-74. The 11 subtests of the WAIS-R include information, digit span, vocabulary, arithmetic, comprehension, similarities, picture completion, picture arrangement, block design, object assembly, and digit symbol. An example of questions on the subtest of similarities might be: “Describe how the following pair of words are alike or the same—hamburger and pizza.” A correct response would be “Both are things to eat.” Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, Third Edition (WISC-III) The WISC-III subtests includes many of the same categories of subtests as the WAIS-R. In addition, there are two optional performance subtests: symbol search and mazes. Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence (WPPSI)

The Wechsler Intelligence Scales for Children (regular, revised, and third edition) and Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence are used as tools in school placement, in determining the presence of a learning disability or a developmental delay, in identifying giftedness, and in tracking intellectual development.

The WPPSI is designed for children age 46½ years. The test is divided into six verbal and five performance subtests. The eleven subtests are presented in the following order: information, animal house and animal house retest, vocabulary, picture completion, arithmetic, mazes, geometric design, similarities, block design, comprehension, and sentences.

The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scales (regular and revised) are used to determine vocational ability, to assess adult intellectual ability in the classroom, and to determine organic deficits. Both adult and children’s Wechsler scales are often included in neuropsychological testing to assess the brain function of individuals with neurological impairments.

The 1997 Medicare reimbursement rate for psychological and neuropsychological testing, including intelligence testing, is $58.35 an hour. Billing time typically includes test administration, scoring and interpretation, and reporting. Many insurance plans cover all or a portion of diagnostic psychological testing.

Precautions Intelligence testing requires a clinically trained examiner. The Wechsler scales should be administered, scored, and interpreted by a trained professional, preferably a psychologist or psychiatrist.

Description All of the Wechsler scales are divided into six verbal and five performance subtests. The complete test takes 60-90 minutes to administer. Verbal and Performance IQs are scored based on the results of the testing, and then a composite Full Scale IQ score is computed. Although earlier editions of some of the Wechsler Scales are still available, the latest revisions are described below: Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-R) The WAIS-R, the 1981 revision of the original Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, is designed for adults, GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Normal results The Wechsler Intelligence Scales are standardized tests, meaning that as part of the test design, they were administered to a large representative sample of the target population, and norms were determined from the results. The scales have a mean, or average, standard score of 100 and a standard deviation of 15. The standard deviation indicates how far above or below the norm the subject’s score is. For example, a ten-year-old is assessed with the WISC-III scale and achieves a full-scale IQ score of 85. The mean score of 100 is the average level at which all 10-year-olds in the representative sample performed. This child’s score would be one standard deviation below that norm. While the full-scale IQ scores provide a reference point for evaluation, they are only an average of a variety of skill areas. A trained psychologist will evaluate and interpret an individual’s performance on the scale’s subtests to discover their strengths and weaknesses and offer recommendations based upon these findings. 3551

Wechsler intelligence test

Water therapy see Hydrotherapy Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome see Meningococcemia Weber test see Hearing tests with a tuning fork

Wegener’s granulomatosis

KEY TERMS Norms—Normative or mean score for a particular age group. Representative sample—A random sample of people that adequately represents the test-taking population in age, gender, race, and socioeconomic standing. Standard deviation—A measure of the distribution of scores around the average (mean). In a normal distribution, two standard deviations above and below the mean includes about 95% of all samples. Standardization—The process of determining established norms and procedures for a test to act as a standard reference point for future test results.

Description Wegener’s granulomatosis (WG) is not a contagious disease, and there is no evidence to suggest that it is hereditary either. It is a very rare disease, affecting only 1 in every 30,000-50,000 people. About 500 new cases are diagnosed each year. The disease can occur at any age, however, it mostly affects individuals in their 30s and 40s. It affects males and females equally. Ninety seven percent of all patients are Caucasian, 2% are Black and 1% are of another race.

Causes and symptoms

Resources BOOKS

Maddox, Taddy. Tests: A Comprehensive Reference for Assessments in Psychology, Education, and Business. 4th ed. Austin: Pro-ed, 1997. Shore, Milton F., Patrick J. Brice, and Barbara G. Love. When Your Child Needs Testing. New York: Crossroad Publishing, 1992. Wodrich, David L. Children’s Psychological Testing: A Guide for Nonpsychologists. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes Publishing, 1997. PERIODICALS

Czubaj, Camilla Anne. “The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale—Revised, Revisited.” Education 117, no. 3 (Winter 1997): 271-3. Slate, John R., and Craig H. Jones. “WISC-III IQ Scores and Special Education Diagnosis.” The Journal of Psychology 131, no. 1 (Jan. 1997): 119-120. ORGANIZATIONS

American Psychological Association (APA). 750 First St. NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242. (202) 336-5700. . The Catholic University of America. Washington, DC 20064. (800) 464-3742. .

Paula Anne Ford-Martin

Wegener’s granulomatosis Definition Wegener’s granulomatosis is a very rare disease that affects many different organs and systems of the body. It 3552

mainly attacks the respiratory system (sinuses, nose, windpipe, and the lungs) and the kidneys. One of the main features of the disease is an inflammation of the blood vessels (vasculitis). The inflammation narrows the blood vessels and reduces the blood flow to the affected organs. This destroys tissues and damages vital organs.

No viral, bacterial, or other causative agent has yet been identified for WG. It is thought to be an autoimmune disease, meaning that the body’s immune system attacks “itself,” that is, the body’s own tissues. Whenever there is an infection in the body, proteins called antibodies, which are capable of attacking the infectious agent, are formed in the blood. In WG, the antibodies that are formed are directed against the white blood cells of the immune system. They are therefore called “auto-antibodies” (antibodies against one’s own body cells). These auto-antibodies bind to the blood cells and forms clumps known as immune complexes. The complexes accumulate in the tissues and the blood vessels, leading to a tumor-like (granulomatous) inflammation of the blood vessels. This slows down the blood flow to the different organs and tissues, causing damage and resulting in the many symptoms of WG. The symptoms of WG, and the severity of the symptoms, vary from patient to patient. One of the most common features is a chronic runny nose and other cold-like symptoms that do not respond to standard treatment. The cold symptoms gradually worsen and could lead to sinusitis (inflammation of the sinuses), middle ear infection (otitis media), cough, coughing of blood, and inflammation of the lung (pleuritis and pneumonia). Other symptoms include fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, weight loss, joint pain, night sweats, change in urine color, and weakness. Kidney (renal) disease is the most serious development of WG. Patients who do not have renal disease are said to have “Limited Wegener’s.” GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Early diagnosis is critical for the most effective treatment of the disease. However, there are no specific laboratory tests for WG. Blood tests are used to rule out other causes of the symptoms and to determine which organs are affected. The blood tests often show anemia (low red cell count) and high white blood cell counts. If the kidneys are involved, red blood cells are seen in the urine when viewed under a microscope. Also, blood tests aimed at measuring kidney function may show abnormalities. Chest x rays are used to determine if the lungs are involved. Computed tomography scans (CT scans) of sinuses and lungs, and kidney biopsy, are also important tools used in diagnosing WG. A specific type of antibody called anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) is seen in the blood of about 90% of the patients with WG. The ANCA are a group of antibodies directed against the individual’s own white blood cells (namely, the neutrophils). These antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies are also found in other inflammatory conditions and diseases (such as HIV infection). Though the ANCA test is useful, it cannot be used by itself to make a diagnosis of WG. However, the amount of ANCA in the blood can be measured and correlates well with the progression of the disease. When there is a relapse or a flare-up, the ANCA levels go up. Levels decrease when the disease is controlled by appropriate treatment. Since there are no definitive laboratory tests for WG, and the initial symptoms of the disease are not very specific, it takes five to 15 months, on an average, to make a diagnosis of WG.

KEY TERMS Auto-antibodies—An antibody that is produced in, and reacts with, an antigen in the same person or animal. Autoimmune disease—Any disease which causes tissue injury due to an immunological reaction of antibodies against the patient’s own tissues. Granulomatous—Resembling a tumor made of granular material. Immune complexes—Clusters or aggregates of antigen and antibody bound together. Vasculitis—Inflammation of the walls of the blood vessels.

prognosis has been dramatically improved. With appropriate treatment, patients can survive for much longer periods and lead relatively normal lives. Approximately 50% of the patients with WG will have a relapse of the disease. This generally happens within two years of stopping the medication, but can occur at any point either during treatment or after stopping treatment. Therefore, it is extremely important that patients continue to see their doctors regularly even after stopping the medications.

Prevention At present, there are no preventive measures known for Wegener’s granulomatosis.

Treatment Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan) which is an anti-cancer drug, and corticosteroids, such as prednisone, are used to treat WG. These are powerful drugs that suppress the immune system. However, they are also very toxic and can have serious side effects. The patient has to be watched carefully by the doctors and the dosage of the drugs has to be adjusted, if needed. Since the patient’s immune system is suppressed while on these drugs, he or she is at an increased risk for contracting infections. Vaccinations for flu and pneumonia are recommended.

Prognosis In the past, approximately 80% of the patients with untreated WG died within a year of contracting the disease and 90% died within two years. Today, however, the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Resources BOOKS

Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. Ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 17th ed. Ed. Robert Berkow, et al. Rahway, NJ: Merck Research Laboratories, 1997. ORGANIZATIONS

National Organization for Rare Disorders. P.O. Box 8923, New Fairfield, CT 06812-8923. (800) 999-6673. . Wegener’s Foundation, Inc. 3705 South George Mason Drive, Suite 1813 South, Falls Church, VA 22041. (703) 931-5852. Wegener’s Granulomatosis Support Group, Inc. P.O. Box 28660, Kansas City, MO 64188-8660. (800) 277-9474. .

Lata Cherath, PhD 3553

Wegener’s granulomatosis

Diagnosis

Wheezing

Weil’s disease see Leptospirosis Wermer’s syndrome see Multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes Wernicke-Korsakoff disease see Alcoholrelated neurologic disease Western equine encephalitis see Arbovirus encephalitis Western herbalism see Herbalism, western

Wheezing Definition Wheezing is a high-pitched whistling sound associated with labored breathing.

Description Wheezing occurs when a child or adult tries to breathe deeply through air passages that are narrowed or filled with mucus as a result of: • allergy • infection • illness • irritation Wheezing is most common when exhaling. It is sometimes accompanied by a mild sensation of tightness in the chest. Anxiety about not being able to breathe easily can cause muscle tension that makes matters worse.

Causes and symptoms Wheezing is the symptom most associated with asthma. It can be caused by: • exposure to allergens (food, pollen, and other substances, that cause a person to have an allergic reaction) • fumes • ice-cold drinks, or very cold air • medication • strenuous exercise • weather changes.

Diagnosis A family physician, allergist, or pulmonary specialist takes a medical history that includes questions about allergies, or unexplained symptoms that may be the result of allergic reactions. If the pattern of the patient’s symptoms suggests the presence of allergy, skin and blood tests are performed to identify the precise nature of the problem. A pulmonary function test may be ordered to measure the amount of air moving through the patient’s breathing passages. X rays are sometimes indicated for patients whose wheezing seems to be caused by chronic bronchitis or emphysema.

Treatment Mild wheezing may be relieved by drinking plenty of juice, water, weak tea, and broth. Ice-cold drinks should be avoided. A vaporizer can help clear air passages. A steam tent, created by lowering the face toward a sink filled with hot water, placing a towel over the head and sink, and inhaling the steam, can do likewise. Bronchodilators (medications that help widen narrowed airways) may be prescribed for patients whose wheezing is the result of asthma. Antibiotics are generally used to cure acute bronchitis and other respiratory infections. Expectorants coughproducing medications) or bronchodilators are prescribed to remove excess mucus from the breathing passages. If wheezing is caused by an allergic reaction, antihistamines will probably be prescribed to neutralize body chemicals that react to the allergen. Medical emergencies Breathing problems can be life-threatening. Immediate medical attention is required whenever an individual: • turns blue or gray and stops breathing • becomes extremely short of breath, and is unable to speak • coughs up bubbly-pink or white phlegm • seems to be suffocating • develops a fever of 101°F (38.3°C) or higher • wheezes most of the time, and coughs up gray or greenish phlegm

• foreign objects trapped in the airway • cystic fibrosis, and other genetic disorders • respiratory illnesses like pneumonia, bronchitis, congestive heart failure, and emphysema 3554

Alternative treatment Certain yoga positions (Bridge, Cobra, Pigeon, and Sphinx) may relieve wheezing by improving breathing GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Prognosis Mild wheezing caused by infection or acute illness usually disappears when the underlying cause is eliminated. Some doctors believe that childhood respiratory infections may activate parts of the immune system that prevent asthma from developing.

Prevention Stopping smoking can eliminate wheezing. So can reducing or preventing exposure to other substances that cause the problem. Resources BOOKS

The Editors of Time-Life Books. The Medical Advisor: The Complete Guide to Alternative and Conventional Treatments. Alexandria, VA: Time Life, Inc., 1996. OTHER

“Kids in Daycare Three Times as Likely to Have Wheezing Illnesses.” Americal Lung Assiciation Page. 16 May 1998 . “Wheezing.” University of Michigan Health System Page. 7 May 1998 . “Wheezing.” WebMD. 17 May 1998 .

Maureen Haggerty

• influence the shape and structure of the spine • affect posture and balance About 1,000,000 whiplash injuries occur in the United States every year. Most are the result of motor vehicle accidents or collisions involving contact sports. When unexpected force jerks the head back, then forward the bones of the neck snap out of position and irritated nerves can interfere with flow of blood and transmission of nerve impulses. Pinched nerves can damage or destroy the function of body parts whose actions they govern. Risk factors Osteoarthritis of the spine increases the risk of whiplash injury. So do poor driving habits, driving in bad weather, or driving when tired, tense, or under the influence of alcohol or other drugs.

Causes and symptoms Tension shortens and tightens muscles. Fatigue relaxes them. Either condition increases the likelihood that whiplash will occur and the probability that the injury will be severe. Sometimes symptoms of whiplash appear right away. Sometimes they do not develop until hours, days, or weeks after the injury occurs. Symptoms of whiplash include: • pain or stiffness in the neck, jaw, shoulders, or arms • dizziness • headache • loss of feeling in an arm or hand • nausea and vomiting Depression and vision problems are rare symptoms of this condition.

Diagnosis

Whiplash Definition Whiplash is a sudden, moderate-to-severe strain affecting the bones, discs, muscles, nerves, or tendons of the neck.

Description The neck is composed of seven small bones. Known as the cervical spine, these bones: • support the head • help maintain an unobstructed enclosure for the spinal cord GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Whiplash is difficult to diagnose because x rays and other imaging studies do not always reveal changes in bone structure. Organs affected by nerve damage or reduced blood supply may generate symptoms not clearly related to whiplash. Diagnosis is based on observation of the patient’s symptoms, medical history, physical examination, and neurological studies to determine whether the spine has been injured.

Treatment Medication, physical therapy, and supportive measures are used to treat whiplash. Chiropractors gently realign the spine to relax pinched nerves or improve blood flow. A patient whose symptoms are severe may 3555

Whiplash

control and reducing stress. Patients whose wheezing is related to asthma, chronic bronchitis, emphysema, or a severe allergic reaction may benefit from these techniques, but must continue to have their condition monitored by a conventional physician.

White blood cell count and differential

wear a soft, padded collar (Thomas collar or cervical collar) until the pain diminishes.

Whipple’s disease see Malabsorption syndrome

When pressure on the root of the nerve causes loss of strength or sensation in a hand or arm, a cervical traction apparatus may be recommended. Self-care Inflammation and cramping can be alleviated by wrapping ice or an ice pack in a thin towel and applying it to the injured area for 10-20 minutes every hour. After the first 24 hours, painful muscle spasms can be prevented by alternating cold packs with heat treatments. Letting a warm shower run on the neck and shoulders for 10-20 minutes twice a day is recommended. Between showers, warm towels or a heat lamp should be used to warm and soothe the neck for 10-15 minutes several times a day. Improving posture is important, and gentle massage can be beneficial. Sleeping without a pillow promotes healing, and a cervical collar or small rolled towel pinned under the chin can provide support and prevent muscle fatigue. Alcohol should be avoided. A chiropractor, primary care physician, or orthopedic specialist should be notified whenever a painful neck injury occurs. Another situation requiring attention is if the face or arm weaken or become painful or numb following a neck injury.

Prognosis With treatment, whiplash can usually be cured in one week to three months after injury occurs. If nerve roots are damaged, numbness and weakness may last until recovery is complete.

Prevention Chiropractors can recommend diet and exercise techniques to reduce stress and tension. Careful, defensive driving, wearing seatbelts, and using padded automobile headrests can lessen the likelihood of whiplash. Resources

White blood cell count and differential Definition The white blood cell count and differential determine the number of white blood cells and the percentage of each type of white blood cell in a person’s blood. These tests are included in general health examinations and help investigate a variety of illnesses, including infection, allergy, and leukemia.

Purpose The white blood cell count provides a clue to the presence of illness. White cells protect the body by fighting infection and attacking foreign material. When extra white cells are needed, the bone marrow increases production. There are five types of white cells, each with different functions: neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils. The differential reveals if these cells are present in a normal distribution, or if one cell type is increased or decreased. This information helps diagnose specific types of illness. Conditions or medications that weaken the immune system, such as AIDS or chemotherapy, cause a decrease in white cells. The white cell count detects dangerously low numbers of white cells. Recovery from illness can be monitored by the white cell count. Counts continuing to rise or fall to abnormal levels indicate a worsening condition; counts returning to normal indicate improvement.

PERIODICALS

Sturzenegger, M., et al. “Presenting Symptoms and Signs after Whiplash Injury: The Influence of Accident Mechanisms.” Neurology 44 (1994): 688. OTHER

“Whiplash.” ThriveOnline. 6 June 1995 . “Whiplash.” Loyola University Health System. 6 June 1998 . Haggerty, Maureen. “Whiplash.” A Healthy Me Page. 7 June 1998 .

Maureen Haggerty 3556

Description Neutrophils increase in response to bacterial infection. They destroy bacteria by enveloping and digesting them, a process called phagocytosis. When many neutrophils are needed, they are released from the bone marrow as immature cells, called bands or stab cells. Lymphocytes fight viral infections and some bacterial infections. Certain lymphocytes directly attack invading microorganisms; others produce antibodies that attack and destroy microorganisms and other foreign material. Large lymphocytes, called atypical lymphoGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Monocytes increase during severe infections, and other conditions. They remove debris and microorganisms by phagocytosis. Eosinophils and basophils increase in response to allergic reactions and parasitic infection. White cell counts are usually done on an automated instrument. A sample of blood is mixed with a chemical to burst the red blood cells. The remaining white cells are counted by the instrument. The differential is done by spreading a drop of blood on a microscope slide. The slide is stained with a special stain and examined under a microscope. One-hundred white cells are counted and identified as either neutrophils, bands, lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils or basophils. Any atypical or immature cells also are counted. Cells are identified by the shape and appearance of the nucleus, the color of cytoplasm (the background of the cell), and the presence and color of granules. The percentage of each cell type is reported. At the same time, red cells and platelets are examined for abnormalities in appearance. Some instruments perform an automated differential. Both the white blood cell count (also called white count or leukocyte count) and the differential (also called diff) are covered by insurance. Results are available the same day.

Preparation This test requires 7 mL of blood. A healthcare worker ties a tourniquet on the person’s upper arm, locates a vein in the inner elbow region, and inserts a needle into that vein. Vacuum action draws the blood through the needle into an attached tube. Collection of the sample takes only a few minutes.

Aftercare Discomfort or bruising may occur at the puncture site. Pressure to the puncture site until the bleeding stops reduces bruising; warm packs relieve discomfort. The person may feel dizzy or faint.

KEY TERMS Band—Immature neutrophil. Basophil—White blood cell that increases in response to parasitic infections and allergic reactions. Differential—Blood test that determines the percentage of each type of white blood cell in a person’s blood. Eosinophil—White blood cell that increases in response to parasitic infections and allergic reactions. Leukocytosis—A white count increased to over 10,000/μL. Leukopenia—A white count decreased to less than 4,000/μL. Lymphocyte—White blood cell that fights viral and some bacterial infections by direct attack or the production of antibodies. Monocyte—White blood cell that increases during a variety of conditions including severe infections. It removes debris and microorganisms by phagocytosis. Neutrophil—White blood cell that increases in response to bacterial infection. It removes and kills bacteria through phagocytosis. Phagocytosis—A process by which a white blood cell envelopes and digests debris and microorganisms to remove them from the blood.

10,000/µL) is seen in bacterial infections, inflammation, leukemia, trauma, and stress. Leukopenia (a white count decreased to less than 4,000/µL) is seen in some viral infections or severe bacterial infections, and conditions that affect the bone marrow such as dietary deficiencies, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and autoimmune diseases. Nancy J. Nordenson

Normal results Total white cell count 5,000-10,000/µL. Neutrophils 50-60%. Lymphocytes 20-40%. Monocytes 2-6%. Eosinophils 1-4%. Basophils 0.5-1%. Bands 0-3%.

Abnormal results The white cell count and differential are interpreted according to a person’s clinical condition and medical history. Leukocytosis (a white count increased to over GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Whooping cough Definition Whooping cough, also known as pertussis, is a highly contagious disease which causes classic spasms 3557

Whooping cough

cytes, are seen during infectious mononucleosis and other illnesses.

Whooping cough

Causes and symptoms Whooping cough has four somewhat overlapping stages: incubation, catarrhal stage, paroxysmal stage, and convalescent stage. An individual usually acquires B. pertussis by inhaling droplets infected with the bacteria coughed into the air by someone already suffering with the infection. Incubation is the symptomless period of seven to 14 days after breathing in the B. pertussis bacteria, and during which the bacteria multiply and penetrate the lining tissues of the entire respiratory tract. The catarrhal stage is often mistaken for an exceedingly heavy cold. The patient has teary eyes, sneezing, fatigue, poor appetite, and an extremely runny nose (rhinorrhea). This stage lasts about 10-14 days.

A magnified image of a pertussis toxin crystal that causes whooping cough. (National Institutes of Health/Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

(paroxysms) of uncontrollable coughing, followed by a sharp, high-pitched intake of air which creates the characteristic “whoop” of the disease’s name.

Description Whooping cough is caused by a bacteria called Bordatella pertussis. B. pertussis causes its most severe symptoms by attaching itself to those cells in the respiratory tract which have cilia. Cilia are small, hair-like projections that beat continuously, and serve to constantly sweep the respiratory tract clean of such debris as mucus, bacteria, viruses, and dead cells. When B. pertussis interferes with this normal, janitorial function, mucus and cellular debris accumulate and cause constant irritation to the respiratory tract, triggering coughing and increasing further mucus production. Whooping cough is a disease which exists throughout the world. While people of any age can contract whooping cough, children under the age of two are at the highest risk for both the disease and for serious complications and death. Apparently, exposure to B. pertussis bacteria earlier in life gives a person some immunity against infection with it later on. Subsequent infections resemble the common cold. 3558

The paroxysmal stage, lasting two to four weeks, begins with the development of the characteristic whooping cough. Spasms of uncontrollable coughing, the “whooping” sound of the sharp inspiration of air, and vomiting are all hallmarks of this stage. The whoop is believed to occur due to inflammation and mucous which narrow the breathing tubes, causing the patient to struggle to get air into his/her lungs; the effort results in intense exhaustion. The paroxysms (spasms) can be induced by over activity, feeding, crying, or even overhearing someone else cough. The mucus which is produced during the paroxysmal stage is thicker and more difficult to clear than the more watery mucus of the catarrhal stage, and the patient becomes increasingly exhausted attempting to clear the respiratory tract through coughing. Severely ill children may have great difficult maintaining the normal level of oxygen in their systems, and may appear somewhat blue after a paroxysm of coughing, due to the low oxygen content of their blood. Such children may also suffer from swelling and degeneration of the brain (encephalopathy), which is believed to be caused both by lack of oxygen to the brain during paroxysms, and also by bleeding into the brain caused by increased pressure during coughing. Seizures may result from decreased oxygen to the brain. Some children have such greatly increased abdominal pressure during coughing that hernias result (hernias are the abnormal protrusion of a loop of intestine through a weak area of muscle). Another complicating factor during this phase is the development of pneumonia from infection with another bacterial agent; the bacteria takes hold due to the patient’s already-weakened condition. If the patient survives the paroxysmal stage, recovery occurs gradually during the convalescent stage, usually taking about three to four weeks. However, spasms of coughing may continue to occur over a period of months, especially when a patient contracts a cold, or other respiratory infection. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Diagnosis based just on the patient’s symptoms is not particularly accurate, as the catarrhal stage may appear to be a heavy cold, a case of the flu, or a simple bronchitis. Other viruses and tuberculosis infections can cause symptoms similar to those found during the paroxysmal stage. The presence of a pertussis-like cough along with an increase of certain specific white blood cells (lymphocytes) is suggestive of pertussis (whooping cough). However, cough can occur from other pertussis-like viruses. The most accurate method of diagnosis is to culture (grow on a laboratory plate) the organisms obtained from swabbing mucus out of the nasopharynx (the breathing tube continuous with the nose). B. pertussis can then be identified by examining the culture under a microscope.

Treatment Treatment with the antibiotic erythromycin is helpful only at very early stages of whooping cough, during incubation and early in the catarrhal stage. After the cilia and the cells bearing those cilia, are damaged, the process cannot be reversed. Such a patient will experience the full progression of whooping cough symptoms; symptoms will only improve when the old, damaged lining cells of the respiratory tract are replaced over time with new, healthy, cilia-bearing cells. However, treatment with erythromycin is still recommended, to decrease the likelihood of B. pertussis spreading. In fact, all members of the household where a patient with whooping cough lives should be treated with erythromycin to prevent the spread of B. pertussis throughout the community. The only other treatment is supportive, and involves careful monitoring of fluids to prevent dehydration, rest in a quiet, dark room to decrease paroxysms, and suctioning of mucus.

Prognosis Just under 1% of all cases of whooping cough cause death. Children who die of whooping cough usually have one or more of the following three conditions present: • severe pneumonia, perhaps with accompanying encephalopathy • extreme weight loss, weakness, and metabolic abnormalities due to persistent vomiting during paroxysms of coughing • other pre-existing conditions, so that the patient is already in a relatively weak, vulnerable state (such conditions may include low birth weight babies, poor nutrition, infection with the measles virus, presence of other respiratory or gastrointestinal infections or diseases) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Cilia—Tiny, hair-like projections from a cell. In the respiratory tract, cilia beat constantly in order to move mucus and debris up and out of the respiratory tree, in order to protect the lung from infection or irritation by foreign bodies. Encephalopathy—Swelling and degeneration of the brain.

Prevention The mainstay of prevention lies in programs similar to the mass immunization program in the United States which begins immunization inoculations when infants are two months old. The pertussis vaccine, most often given as one immunization together with diphtheria and tetanus, has greatly reduced the incidence of whooping cough. Unfortunately, there has been some concern about serious neurologic side effects from the vaccine itself. This concern led huge numbers of parents in England, Japan, and Sweden to avoid immunizing their children, which in turn has led to major epidemics of disease in those countries. However, several carefully constructed research studies have disproved the idea that the pertussis vaccine is the cause of neurologic damage. Furthermore, a newer formulation of the pertussis vaccine is available. Unlike the old whole cell pertussis vaccine, which is composed of the entire bacterial cell which has been deactivated (and therefore unable to cause infection), the newer acellular pertussis vaccine does not use a whole cell of the bacteria, but is made up of (between two and five) chemical components of the B. pertussis bacteria. The acellular pertussis vaccine appears to greatly reduce the risk of unpleasant reactions to the vaccine, including high fever and discomfort following vaccination. Resources BOOKS

“Pertussis.” In Sherris Medical Microbiology: An Introduction to Infectious Diseases. 3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. Stoffman, Phyllis. The Family Guide to Preventing and Treating 100 Infectious Diseases. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1995. PERIODICALS

Jenkinson, Douglas. “Natural Course of 500 Consecutive Cases of Whooping Cough: A General Practice Population Study.” British Medical Journal 310, no. 6975 (4 Feb. 1995): 299+.

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD 3559

Whooping cough

Diagnosis

Wilderness medicine

Wilderness medicine Definition Wilderness medicine encompasses the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of injuries and medical conditions that may occur during activities in remote territories.

Purpose Activities that may require wilderness medicine include backpacking, cross-country skiing, mountaineering, white water rafting, scuba diving, and exploration in undeveloped regions such as deserts or jungles. Wilderness medicine has evolved to deal with situations in which definitive medical care is hours or days away, and in which patients may require quick or extended attention. Wilderness medicine utilizes first aid techniques, but requires additional skills that take into account demanding environments, uncommon threats to health, hazardous or lengthy travel to medical facilities, and difficulties in obtaining food, water, and shelter. Wilderness medicine uses techniques to assess and treat a variety of conditions and injuries, including: • wounds and burns • external and internal bleeding • cardiac arrest • head injuries • spinal cord injuries • fractures and dislocations • altitude sickness • problems from cold and heat • allergic and anaphylactic reactions • lightning strikes • near drowning • insect, reptile and animal bites • poisoning • emergency child birth

Precautions In wilderness situations caregivers should follow the maxim of first, do no harm. Uninjured members of groups should not attempt rescues that place themselves in danger. People administering first aid or wilderness medicine should remain calm and organized at all times. Only those with experience should administer medications and medical procedures. Injured people should not be moved until they are fully evaluated, or unless envi3560

ronmental conditions are threatening and require immediate shelter. People with certain medical conditions should avoid travel in the wilderness, which can make existing conditions worse. These conditions include metastatic cancer, peptic ulcers, coronary artery disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, clotting or bleeding disorders, highaltitude sickness, chronic rheumatoid arthritis, chronic severe back pain, and chronic knee and hip joint disease.

Description The first stage of wilderness medicine begins with an assessment of the injury or condition. Primary assessment is used to quickly determine if a patient is in a life-threatening situation and to provide immediate emergency care. Secondary assessment is the thorough evaluation of a patient after life-threatening circumstances are relieved. Primary assessment A rule of thumb for the first steps of primary assessment, recommended by the Wilderness Medicine Institute, is the ABCDE procedure. It stands for Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, and Exposure assessment. First, a patient’s airway should be checked by close observation of whether or not air can move in and out and any obstructions to breathing should be alleviated. In unconscious people the tongue can often fall to the back of the throat and block breathing and the head should be tilted back and the lower jaw raised to alleviate the obstruction. If neck or spinal cord injuries are suspected, the head must be handled with extreme care to avoid further injury to the delicate spinal cord. In these cases, the lower jaw can be pulled forward to open the airway. If the neck is severely out of alignment due to an injury or fall, it may be gently realigned to free the airway. After the airway is cleared and breathing is ensured, a patient’s circulation is checked by noting the pulse of the carotid artery, on the neck, the pulse of the femoral artery in the front groin, and by listening to the heartbeat. If pulse is lacking, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) may be required, which requires chest compression and mouthto-mouth breathing. Circulation checks include surveying a patient for bleeding. If severe bleeding is present, it should be stopped by direct pressure to the injured area, and by elevating the wound level to the heart if possible. Disability assessment means checking for damage to the spinal cord, particularly in the cervical region of the neck. Assessment of exposure determines if environmental conditions, such as heat or cold, are immediate threats to a patient’s life, which may require actions such as seeking shelter or covering the patient with protective clothing. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

During this stage, a thorough physical examination of the patient is made from head to toe to determine the extent of injuries or problems. Caretakers performing the assessment should write detailed notes in order to inform physicians or emergency workers later. Patients are thoroughly interviewed to determine the scope of problems and any previous medical issues that might be related. Patients should be spoken to calmly to determine their mental states and how well they respond to stimuli. Vital signs such as heart rate and respiration rate should be noted and monitored. The skin should be carefully observed for injuries, boils, rashes, and discoloration. Red or flushed skin may indicate fever or heat-related conditions, while pale or blotchy skin can point to shock or hypothermia. A bluish tint to the skin may mean a lack of oxygen. Contact lenses should be removed from patients in cold conditions, as they can freeze to the eyes. During secondary assessment the patient should be closely monitored over time until improvement is noted or further treatment decisions are made. At all times in wilderness injuries, shock must be watched for and immediately treated. Shock In wilderness situations shock should be suspected after traumatic injuries, significant loss of blood due to internal or external bleeding, extreme loss of fluids from vomiting or diarrhea, heart attacks, and spinal cord injuries. Shock is easiest to alleviate when it is treated early; when not treated properly, it can progress to unconsciousness and death. When the likelihood of shock occurs, patients should be continually monitored and supported. Symptoms of shock begin with anxiety and restlessness, with increased heart rates and labored, shallow breathing. Shock victims tend to sweat profusely with cool and clammy skin. Thirst and nausea are also symptoms. Shock is treated in the wilderness by maintaining an open airway for the patient to breathe, by treating any injuries such as bleeding wounds, by reducing pain if possible, and by replenishing fluids. Patients should be kept calm and warm and their feet should be elevated if possible to increase blood flow to the organs. If shock symptoms progress, plans should be quickly made to get help or evacuate the patient.

time considerations involved, and the availability of outside help. In general if a patient with severe symptoms is not improving despite care then evacuation becomes necessary. The Wilderness Medical Society lists symptoms that require postponing travel or evacuating patients: • progressive deterioration with symptoms of dizziness, fainting, abnormally slow (bradycardia) or fast (tachycardia) heart rate, labored breathing, poor mental status, progressive weakness, constant vomiting or diarrhea, intolerance of oral fluids, or recurrent loss of consciousness due to head injuries • debilitating pain • inability to sustain pace due to medical problems • passage of blood by mouth or rectum • symptoms of serious high-altitude illness • infections that get worse despite treatment • chest pain that is not musculoskeletal in origin • psychological status threatening the individual or group If a patient cannot be moved without risk of further injury, then other members of a party, preferably two or more, should be sent to get outside help. When requesting outside assistance, the safety of incoming rescuers and time constraints should be weighed. Requests for outside help should be made in writing, and include an assessment of the patient and situation as well as a detailed location of the incident. In some regions, helicopter evacuation may be an option, and should be used if an injury is life-threatening. During evacuation patients must be handled with extreme care, as well as insulated from heat, cold and further injuries. Larger wilderness expeditions may have special devices available for transporting injured members, while smaller parties may have to improvise transporting devices by using backpacks, ropes and other available materials. Wounds and burns In wilderness situations wound management strives to stop bleeding, prevent infection, and speed healing. Bleeding from wounds should be controlled by direct pressure. Wounds and burns should be cleaned gently and thoroughly, treated with antibiotic ointment, and covered with bandages to avoid infections. Wounds that have high risks of infections, such as large cuts, open fractures, and animal bites, should be watched closely.

Evacuation Evacuation of a patient may be a crucial decision in the wilderness, depending upon the severity of an injury or condition, the difficulty of moving the patient, the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

External and internal bleeding External bleeding should be stopped by direct pressure, such as firmly applying a clean bandage or compress 3561

Wilderness medicine

Secondary assessment

Wilderness medicine

to an open wound. Secondary pressure may be applied to pressure points, such as the large arteries in the upper arm or groin, to slow bleeding. Tourniquets are recommended only in life-threatening situations, as they can cause complications and infections. Symptoms of internal bleeding include dizziness, fainting, rapid heartbeat, weak pulse, shortness of breath, thirst, loss of color, vomiting blood, blood in the feces or urine, and severe pain or swelling in the abdomen. If internal bleeding is suspected, medical help should be sought immediately. With all cases of significant blood loss, shock must be carefully considered. Cardiac arrest Cardiac arrest in the wilderness may require CPR, although CPR is less effective in remote regions that lack access to the life support technology that ambulances quickly supply. CPR should be administered to patients who have suffered near drowning, hypothermia, lightning strikes, and drug overdoses. CPR generally should not be administered in the wilderness if it endangers the rescuers, if the time of the cardiac arrest is unknown, if the patient appears to be dead or rigor mortis has set in, or if cardiac arrest was caused by severe trauma or lethal injuries. Head injuries Head injuries that do not cause loss of consciousness in the victim are rarely dangerous. Short-term loss of consciousness following head injuries is known as concussion, and these patients should be closely monitored for 24 hours, including waking them every three hours during sleep to check for mental alertness. For head injuries that cause prolonged unconsciousness, the airway and cervical spine must be protected. Severe brain injury is indicated by relapses into unconsciousness, bad headaches, bleeding from the ears, clear fluid draining from the nose, vomiting, persistent disorientation, personality changes, seizures, irregular heartbeat and breathing, and unequal or unreactive pupils. Severe head injuries must be treated by seeking immediate medical help or evacuation. Spinal cord injuries If spinal cord injuries are suspected, patients must be immobilized. Some expeditions or rescue teams may carry special splints or vests in their medical kits. If no such equipment is available, spineboards may be fashioned from available materials such as backpacks, poles, or ice axes to prevent unnecessary movement of the injured backbone. Fractures and dislocations Wilderness care for fractures recommends immobilization by using splints and slings. If manufactured 3562

splints and slings are not available in the medicine kit, they can be improvised by using natural materials, ski poles, ice axes, clothing, or parts of backpacks. In the case of dislocations, standard wilderness procedure is to splint, tape and stabilize the injury in the current position. However, if circulation or nerve function is impaired, or if the injured person is in extreme pain, relocation may be necessary by realigning the injured area. Relocation is most effective if it is done immediately following the injury, before stiffness or muscle spasms set in. Altitude sickness Symptoms of altitude sickness include headache, nausea, fatigue, vomiting, and bluish skin. Ataxia, or loss of muscular control and balance indicates more severe altitude sickness. Altitude sickness can occur at altitudes above 8,000 feet. The best prevention of the condition is allowing plenty of time for acclimatization at high altitudes, drinking plenty of fluids, and eating a diet rich in carbohydrates. Aspirin or acetaminophen may be taken, while the drug acetazolamide (Diamox) can relieve symptoms of mild acute mountain sickness (AMS). Other related conditions, which can cause death, are high altitude cerebral edema (HACE), which causes fluid accumulation on the brain, and high altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE), which causes fluid in the lungs. The main treatment for acute mountain sickness is to rapidly descend to lower altitudes. In some cases oxygen may be available to ease symptoms. Problems from cold and heat Frostbite is localized tissue damage from exposure to cold, and is remedied by the slow warming of exposed parts, preferably in heated water. Hypothermia is the condition resulting from lowered body core temperature, and is a common affliction in wilderness medicine. Mild hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature (measured rectally) falls from normal to 95°F (35°C) Fahrenheit. Moderate hypothermia gives temperatures between 90-95°F (32.2-35°C), while severe hypothermia occurs when a body’s core temperature falls below 90°F (32.2°C). Symptoms include severe shivering, confusion, apathy, drowsiness, slurred speech, and impaired reflexes, and progresses to the point of unconsciousness. Even cases of the mildest hypothermia must be cared for closely. Patients in whom hypothermia is suspected should be immediately warmed by gently removing wet clothing and providing dry clothing, blankets and shelter. They should be monitored for body temperature changes. Severe hypothermia cannot be remedied in the wilderness; victims must be immediately and gently evacuated. Warming severe hypothermia victims too GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Illness from heat includes heat exhaustion and the more severe heat stroke. Symptoms include confusion, rapid weak pulse, cramps, dizziness, nausea, diarrhea, headache, and high measured temperatures. Sweating may or may not occur, and the skin may be clammy and blotched. The principle treatment for heat illness in the wilderness is immediate cooling of the patient, by providing shade, fanning, sponging and immersion in cold water. Heat exhaustion will correct itself with enough rest and water. Heat stroke is life threatening and requires immediate cooling and rehydration with fluids, preferably intravenous ones. Prevention of heat illness includes proper conditioning, protective clothing, and avoiding dehydration. Insect, reptile, and animal bites Wilderness medicine must deal with an array of bites and stings, from bears, snakes, reptiles, spiders, scorpions, bees, fish and ticks. Prevention includes knowledge of the threats in the region being explored, as well as packing appropriate supplies such as bee sting kits for anaphylactic shock and snakebite kits for venomous attacks. The goal of treatment is to stop bleeding, prevent infection, and alleviate envenomation, or exposure to poison. The Sawyer Extractor is a suction tool used to remove snake venom, while the Epipen and Anakit are available by prescription for anaphylactic shock due to stings and severe allergic reactions.

Preparation Knowledge and sound planning can be the difference between success and disaster in the backcountry. Members of extended wilderness outings should undergo thorough examinations by their physicians and dentists prior to undertaking expeditions. People going on wilderness outings should begin in a state of sound physical fitness by undertaking appropriate conditioning programs, as well as becoming acclimatized to special conditions such as altitude or extreme temperatures. Those with medications should be aware of potential side effects and complications, and inform other members of their group. At least two, and preferably all, members of wilderness expeditions should be familiar with first aid, wilderness medicine and rescue procedures. All members of wilderness outings should carry appropriate clothing, equipment, food, water, and first aid supplies. Trip itineraries should be recorded with park rangers or other official services. Means of communication with rescue facilities should be considered in advance in case emergencies arise. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Carrying adequate medical supplies is a crucial preparation for wilderness outings. These supplies will vary depending on the length of the trip and the region. Medical kits should contain basic first aid supplies such as bandages, dressings, pain relievers, water purification tablets, sunscreen, antiseptics, and ointments. Additional medical supplies include antibiotics, medications for gastrointestinal problems, antihistamines and emergency kits for asthma or allergic reactions, snake and insect bite kits, splints, and basic surgical supplies. Extended expeditions or those facing extreme conditions might include intravenous fluids, oxygen bottles for altitude problems, rescue gear and evacuation equipment, and specific medications for regional diseases and infections, such as malaria. Immunizations are a very important preparation for those entering wilderness areas, particularly in Third World countries. Immunizations should be planned as far in advance as possible, as some take several weeks to become effective and others cannot be given together. Some immunizations that may be required, depending on the region, include tetanus, poliovirus, measles, mumps, rubella, cholera, yellow fever, meningococcus, hepatitis, bubonic plague, typhoid fever and rabies. See Resources below for sources of specific immunization information. Several organizations provide training and certification for various levels of wilderness medicine. The most basic levels of preparation are first aid and first responder certifications, followed by outdoor emergency care (OEC) training. More rigorous training provides the wilderness first responder (WFR), the wilderness emergency medical technician (WEMC), or the wilderness prehospital emergency care (WPHEC) certifications. The most advanced level of wilderness medical certification is search and rescue (SAR) emergency care, which provides expertise in a sophisticated array of rescue techniques and equipment.

Resources BOOKS

Auerbach, Paul, MD. Medicine for the Outdoors. New York: The Lyons Press, 1999. Bowman, Warren, MD. Outdoor Emergency Care. Lakewood, CO: National Ski Patrol, 1998. Forgey, William, MD. Wilderness Medical Society Practice Guidelines for Wilderness Emergency Care. Merrillville, IN: ICS Books, 1995. Tilton, Buck, and Frank Hubbell, DO. Medicine for the Backcountry. Old Saybrook, CT: Globe Pequot, 1994. Wilkerson, James. Medicine for Mountaineering and Other Wilderness Activities. Seattle: The Mountaineers, 1992. 3563

Wilderness medicine

quickly is dangerous. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) may be initiated on victims of severe hypothermia who have cardiac arrest. In cases of near drowning, hypothermia must always be suspected.

Wilms’ tumor

KEY TERMS Anaphylactic shock—Severe allergic reaction characterized by airway constriction, tissue swelling, and lowered blood pressure. Cardiac arrest—Heart failure or heart attack. Dislocation—Displacement of bones at a joint. Envenomation—Exposure to venom by bites or stings from insects, reptiles, and fish. Wilderness—Large backcountry areas lacking roads, communication and other modern infrastructure.

ORGANIZATIONS

International Association for Medical Assistance to Travelers (IAMAT). 417 Center St., Lewistown, NY 14092. (716) 754-4883. U.S. Centers for Disease Control. 1600 Clifton Road NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (404) 639-1610. . Publishes Health Information for International Travel. Wilderness Medical Society. PO Box 2463, Indianapolis, IN 46204. (317) 631-1745. Wilderness Medicine Institute. PO Box 9, 413 Main Street, Pitkin, CO 81241. (970) 641-3572. .

Douglas Dupler

Wilms’ tumor Definition Wilms’ tumor is a cancerous tumor of the kidney that usually occurs in young children.

Description When an unborn baby is developing, the kidneys are formed from primitive cells. Over time, these cells become more specialized. The cells mature and organize into the normal kidney structure. Sometimes, clumps of these cells remain in their original, primitive form. If these cells begin to multiply after birth, they may ultimately form a large mass of abnormal cells. This is known as a Wilms’ tumor. Wilms’ tumor is a type of malignant tumor. This means that it is made up of cells that are significantly immature and abnormal. These cells are also capable of 3564

invading nearby structures within the kidney and traveling out of the kidney into other structures. Malignant cells can even travel through the body to invade other organ systems, most commonly the lungs and brain. These features of Wilms’ tumor make it a type of cancer that, without treatment, would eventually cause death. However, advances in medicine during the last 20 years have made Wilms’ tumor a very treatable form of cancer. Wilms’ tumor occurs almost exclusively in young children. The average patient is about three years old. Females are only slightly more likely than males to develop Wilms’ tumors. In the United States, Wilms’ tumor occurs in 8.3 individuals per million in white children under the age of 15 years. The rate is higher among African-Americans and lower among AsianAmericans. Wilms’ tumors are found more commonly in patients with other types of birth defects. These defects include: • absence of the colored part (the iris) of the eye (aniridia) • enlargement of one arm, one leg, or half of the face (hemihypertrophy) • certain birth defects of the urinary system or genitals • certain genetic syndromes (WAGR syndrome, DenysDrash syndrome, and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome)

Causes and symptoms The cause of Wilms’ tumor is not completely understood. Because 15% of all patients with this type of tumor have other heritable defects, it seems clear that at least some cases of Wilms’ tumor may be due to an herited alteration. It appears that the tendency to develop a Wilms’ tumor can run in families. In fact, about 1.5% of all children with a Wilms’ tumor have family members who have also had a Wilms’ tumor. The genetic mechanisms associated with the disease are unusually complex. Some patients with Wilms’ tumor experience abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, high blood pressure, or blood in the urine. However, the parents of many children with this type of tumor are the first to notice a firm, rounded mass in their child’s abdomen. This discovery is often made while bathing or dressing the child and frequently occurs before any other symptoms appear. Rarely, a Wilms’ tumor is diagnosed after there has been bleeding into the tumor, resulting in sudden swelling of the abdomen and a low red blood cell count (anemia). About 5% of Wilms’ tumor cases involve both kidneys during the initial evaluation. The tumor appears on either side equally. When pathologists look at these tumor cells under the microscope, they see great diversity in the types of cells. Some types of cells are associated GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Wilms’ tumor

with a more favorable outcome in the patient than others. In about 15% of cases, physicians find some degree of cancer spread (metastasis). The most common sites in the body where metastasis occurs are the liver and lungs. Researchers have found evidence that certain types of lesions occur before the development of the Wilms’ tumor. These lesions usually appear in the form of stromal, tubule, or blastemal cells. Wilm’s tumor

Diagnosis Children with Wilms’ tumor generally first present to physicians with a swollen abdomen or with an obvious abdominal mass. The physician may also find that the child has fever, bloody urine, or abdominal pain. The physician will order a variety of tests before imaging is performed. These tests mostly involve blood analysis in the form of a white blood cell count, complete blood count, platelet count, and serum calcium evaluation. Liver and kidney function testing will also be performed as well as a urinalysis. Initial diagnosis of Wilms’ tumor is made by looking at the tumor using various imaging techniques. Ultrasound and computed tomography scans (CT scans) are helpful in diagnosing Wilms’ tumor. Intravenous pyelography, where a dye injected into a vein helps show the structures of the kidney, can also be used in diagnosing this type of tumor. Final diagnosis, however, depends on obtaining a tissue sample from the mass (biopsy), and examining it under a microscope in order to verify that it has the characteristics of a Wilms’ tumor. This biopsy is usually done during surgery to remove or decrease the size of the tumor. Other studies (chest x rays, CT scan of the lungs, bone marrow biopsy) may also be done in order to see if the tumor has spread to other locations.

Treatment Treatment for Wilms’ tumor almost always begins with surgery to remove or decrease the size of the kidney tumor. Except in patients who have tumors in both kidneys, this surgery usually will require complete removal of the affected kidney. During surgery, the surrounding lymph nodes, the area around the kidneys, and the entire abdomen will also be examined. While the tumor can spread to these surrounding areas, it is less likely to do so compared to other types of cancer. In cases where the tumor affects both kidneys, surgeons will try to preserve the kidney with the smaller tumor by removing only a portion of the kidney, if possible. Additional biopsies of these areas may be done to see if the cancer has spread. The next treatment steps depend on whether/where the cancer has spread. Samples of the tumor are also examGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Wilm’s tumor. (Illustration by Argosy, Inc.)

ined under a microscope to determine particular characteristics of the cells making up the tumor. Information about the tumor cell type and the spread of the tumor is used to decide the best kind of treatment for a particular patient. Treatment is usually a combination of surgery, medications used to kill cancer cells (chemotherapy), and x rays or other high-energy rays used to kill cancer cells (radiation therapy). These therapies are called adjuvant therapies, and this type of combination therapy has been shown to substantially improve outcome in patients with Wilms’ tumor. It has long been known that Wilms’ tumors respond to radiation therapy. Likewise, some types of chemotherapy have been found to be effective in treating Wilms’ tumor. These effective drugs include dactinomycin, doxorubicin, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide. In rare cases, bone marrow transplantation may be used. The National Wilms’ Tumor Study Group has developed a staging system to describe Wilms’ tumors. All of the stages assume that surgical removal of the tumor has occurred. Stage I involves “favorable” Wilms’ tumor cells and is usually treated successfully with combination chemotherapy involving dactinomycin and vincristine and without abdominal radiation therapy. Stage II tumors 3565

Wilson disease

KEY TERMS Biopsy—A procedure in which a small sample of tissue is removed, prepared, and examined with a microscope to determine the characteristics of the tissue’s cells. Blastemal—An immature material from which cells and tissues develop.

ally those who have a small-sized tumor, a favorable cell type, are young (especially under two years old), and have an early stage of cancer that has not spread. Modern treatments have been especially effective in the treatment of this cancer. Patients with the favorable type of cell have a long-term survival rate of 93%, whereas those with anaplasia have a long-term survival rate of 43% and those with the sarcoma form have a survival rate of 36%.

Prevention

Cancer—A process where abnormal cells within the body begin to grow out of control, acquire the ability to invade nearby structures, and travel through the bloodstream in order to invade distant structures.

There are no known ways to prevent a Wilms’ tumor, although it is important that children with birth defects associated with Wilms’ tumor be carefully monitored.

Malignant—Refers to cancer or cancer cells.

Resources

Sarcoma—A type of cancer that originates from connective tissue such as bone or muscle.

BOOKS

Stromal—A type of tissue that is associated with the support of an organ. Tubule—Tissues and cells associated with the structures that connect the renal pelvis to the glomeruli.

Black, Timothy L. “Wilms’ Tumor.” In Dambro: Griffith’s 5Minute Clinical Consult. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott, 1999. “Wilms’ Tumor.” In Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. DeVita, Vincent Jr., et al, eds. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company, 2001. Cecil Textbook of Medicine. Goldman, Lee, et al, eds. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders Company, 2000. PERIODICALS

involving a favorable histology (cell characteristics) are usually treated with the same therapy as Stage I. Stage III tumors with favorable histology are usually treated with a combination chemotherapy with doxorubicin, dactinomycin, and vincristine along with radiation therapy to the abdomen. Stage IV disease with a favorable histology is generally treated with combination chemotherapy with dactinomycin, doxorubicin, and vincristine. These patients usually receive abdominal radiation therapy and lung radiation therapy if the tumor has spread to the lungs. In the case of Stage II through IV tumors with unfavorable, or anaplastic, cells, then the previously-mentioned combination chemotherapy is used along with the drug cyclophosphamide. These patients also receive lung radiation therapy if the tumor has spread to the lungs. Another type of tumor cell can be present in Stages I through IV. This cell type is called clear cell sarcoma of the kidney. If this type of cell is present, then patients receive combination therapy with vincristine, doxorubicin, and dactinomycin. All of these patients receive abdominal radiation therapy and lung radiation therapy if the tumor has spread to the lungs.

Coppes, Max J., and Kathy Pritchard-Jones. “Principles of Wilms’ Tumor Biology.” Urologic Clinics of North America 27 (August 2000). Neville, Holly L., and Michael L. Ritchey. “Wilms’ Tumor.” Urologic Clinics of North America 27 (August 2000). ORGANIZATIONS

American Cancer Society. 1515 Clifton Rd. NE, Atlanta, GA 30329. (800) 227-2345. . March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation, National Office. 1275 Mamaroneck Ave., White Plains, NY 10605. .

Mark A. Mitchell, M.D.

Wilson disease Definition Wilson disease is a rare, inherited disorder that causes excess copper to accumulate in the body. Steadily increasing amounts of copper circulating in the blood are deposited primarily in the brain, liver, kidneys, and the cornea of the eyes.

Prognosis The prognosis for patients with Wilms’ tumor is quite good, compared to the prognosis for most types of cancer. The patients who have the best prognosis are usu3566

Description Under normal conditions, copper that finds its way into the body through the diet is processed within the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

In Wilson disease, copper does not pass from the liver into the bile, but rather begins to accumulate within the liver. As copper levels rise in the liver, the damaged organ begins to allow copper to flow into the bloodstream, where it circulates. Copper is then deposited throughout the body, building up primarily in the kidneys, the brain and nervous system, and the eyes. Wilson disease, then, is a disorder of copper poisoning occurring from birth. Wilson disease affects approximately one in 30,000 to one in 100,000 individuals and can affect people from many different populations. Approximately one in 90 individuals are carriers of the gene for Wilson disease.

Causes and symptoms Wilson disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. Autosomal recessive refers to the pattern of inheritance where each parent carries a gene for the disease on one of his or her chromosome pairs. When each parent passes on the chromosome with the gene for Wilson disease, the child will be affected with the disease. Both males and females can be affected with Wilson disease. If an individual is a carrier of the Wilson disease gene they do not have any symptoms of this disease. In order to be affected, an individual must inherit two copies of the gene, one from each parent. Many cases of Wilson disease may not be inherited but occur as a spontaneous mutation in the gene. The gene for Wilson disease is located on chromosome number 13. The name of the gene is called ATP7B and is thought to be involved in transporting copper. As of 2001, over 70 different mutations of this gene have been identified, making diagnosis by genetic testing difficult. Symptoms typically present between the ages of three and 60 with age 17 considered to be the average age a diagnosis is made. About half of all patients experience their first symptoms in the liver. The illness causes swelling and tenderness of the liver, sometimes with fever, mimicking more common disorders, such as viral hepatitis and infectious mononucleosis. Abnormal levels of circulating liver enzymes reveal that the liver is being seriously damaged. This form of damage is referred to as “fatty degeneration.” Without medical GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

intervention, the liver damage will progress to actual cirrhosis. An often-fatal manifestation of liver disease is called fulminant hepatitis. This extremely severe inflammation of the liver (hepatitis) results in jaundice, fluid leaking into the abdomen, low protein circulating in the blood, abnormalities of the blood clotting system, swelling of the brain, and anemia due to the abnormal destruction of red blood cells. Neurological symptoms are the first to occur in half of all patients due to copper accumulation in the brain and nervous system. The average age of onset for neurological symptoms is 21. These symptoms include tremors of the hands, uncontrollable movements of the limbs, stiffness, drooling, difficulty swallowing, difficulty talking, and headache. There is no change in patient’s intelligence. About one third of all patients with Wilson disease have a variety of psychiatric symptoms as the first signs of the disease. These symptoms include inability to cope, depression, irritability, increased anger, and inappropriate behavior. Often times patients have trouble completing tasks at work or in school. Other symptoms that can affect patients with Wilson disease, and may occur before or after a diagnosis has been made include joint disorders, symptoms of arthritis and skeletal problems such as osteoporosis. Patients have occasionally been affected with kidney stones, abnormal handling of glucose in their body and women have menstrual cycle irregularities including stopping their regular cycle temporarily.

Diagnosis The diagnosis of Wilson disease can be performed relatively easily through several different tests however because Wilson disease is so rare, diagnosis is often unfortunately delayed. The tests used to diagnose Wilson disease can be performed on patients who have and who have not already shown symptoms of the disease. It is extremely important to make a diagnosis as soon as possible since liver damage can occur before there are any signs of the disease. An easy way to diagnose Wilson disease is to measure the amount of a glycoprotein found in the blood called ceruloplasmin. Low levels of ceruloplasmin can diagnose the disease in about 80% of affected patients. This procedure is not as effective for women taking birth control pills, pregnant women, or infants less than six months of age. A second test involving an eye examination to detect a characteristic ring of copper deposited in a membrane of the cornea (referred to as Kayser-Fleischer rings)is very easy to perform and is very useful in diag3567

Wilson disease

liver. This processed form of copper is then passed into the gallbladder, along with the other components of bile (a fluid produced by the liver, which enters the small intestine in order to help in digestive processes). When the gallbladder empties its contents into the first part of the small intestine (duodenum), the copper in the bile enters and passes through the intestine with the waste products of digestion. In healthy individuals, copper is then passed out of the body in stool.

Wilson disease

KEY TERMS Anemia—A blood condition in which the level of hemoglobin or the number of red blood cells falls below normal values. Common symptoms include paleness, fatigue, and shortness of breath. Bile—A substance produced by the liver, and concentrated and stored in the gallbladder. Bile contains a number of different substances, including bile salts, cholesterol, and bilirubin. Biopsy—The surgical removal and microscopic examination of living tissue for diagnostic purposes. Cell—The smallest living units of the body which group together to form tissues and help the body perform specific functions. Ceruloplasmin—A protein circulating in the bloodstream that binds with copper and transports it. Chromosome—A microscopic thread-like structure found within each cell of the body and consists of a complex of proteins and DNA. Humans have 46 chromosomes arranged into 23 pairs. Changes in either the total number of chromosomes or their shape and size (structure) may lead to physical or mental abnormalities. Cirrhosis—A chronic degenerative disease of the liver, in which normal cells are replaced by fibrous tissue. Cirrhosis is a major risk factor for the later development of liver cancer.

nosing patients who have already exhibited symptoms. This test is not as effective in persons without symptoms. This diagnostic test cannot be used by itself to make a diagnosis because some patients with liver disease but not Wilson disease will test positive. A third test for diagnosing Wilson disease involves measuring the amount of copper in the liver. This can be accomplished by sampling a portion of the liver, called a biopsy. This is one of the most effective ways in which to diagnose Wilson disease, however the procedure itself is more difficult to perform than the others. Other tests are also useful, for example measuring the amount of copper passed into the urine daily (high in Wilson disease). Another lab test measures the ability of a patient’s ceruloplasmin to bind with a form of copper (decreased in Wilson disease). And finally, as discussed under genetic profile, some patients can be diagnosed through a DNA test to determine whether or not they 3568

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)—The genetic material in cells that holds the inherited instructions for growth, development, and cellular functioning. Gallbladder—A small, pear-shaped organ in the upper right hand corner of the abdomen. It is connected by a series of ducts (tube-like channels) to the liver, pancreas, and duodenum (first part of the small intestine). The gallbladder receives bile from the liver, and concentrates and stores it. After a meal, bile is squeezed out of the gallbladder into the intestine, where it aids in digestion of food. Gene—A building block of inheritance, which contains the instructions for the production of a particular protein, and is made up of a molecular sequence found on a section of DNA. Each gene is found on a precise location on a chromosome. Glucose—One of the two simple sugars, together with galactose, that makes up the protein, lactose, found in milk. Glucose is the form of sugar that is usable by the body to generate energy. Hepatitis—A viral disease characterized by inflammation of the liver cells (hepatocytes). People infected with hepatitis B or hepatitis C virus are at an increased risk for developing liver cancer. Jaundice—Yellowing of the skin or eyes due to excess of bilirubin in the blood. Toxic—Poisoinous.

carry two genes for Wilson disease. This test does not always provide to be useful in certain patients and is of most use when used to test the brothers and sisters of affected patients.

Treatment Treatment involves life-long administration of either D-penicillamine or trientine hydrochloride. Both of these drugs remove copper deposits throughout the body by binding to the copper which is removed through the body in urine. Zinc acetate and a low copper diet are other ways in which to treat Wilson disease. Penicillamine has a number of serious side effects: • joint pain • neurological problems • systemic lupus erythematosus • decreased production of all blood elements GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• allergic reactions Careful monitoring is necessary. When patients have side effects from penicillamine, the dose can sometimes be lowered to an effective level that causes fewer difficulties. Alternatively, steroid medications may be required to reduce certain sensitivity reactions. Trientine has fewer potential side effects, but must still be carefully monitored. Treatment with zinc is also an effective way to remove excess copper from the body. Zinc is a metal that works to block copper absorption and bind copper in the intestinal cells until it is all released into the stool approximately one week later. The benefit of treatment with zinc is there are no toxic side effects however the zinc is a slower acting agent than the other drugs. It takes four to eight months for the zinc to be effective in reducing the overall amount of copper in the body. Finally, patients with Wilson disease are encouraged to follow a diet low in copper, with an average copper intake of 1.0 mg/day. Foods to be avoided for the high levels of copper include liver and shellfish. Patients are also instructed to monitor their drinking water for excess levels of copper and drink distilled water instead.

Prognosis Without treatment, Wilson disease is always fatal. With treatment, symptoms may continue to worsen for the first six to eight weeks. After this time, definite improvement should begin to be seen. However, it may take several years (two to five) of treatment to reach maximal benefit to the brain and liver. Even then, many patients are not returned to their original level of functioning. Patients with Wilson disease need to maintain some sort of anticopper treatment for the rest of their lives in order to prevent copper levels from rising in the body. Interruptions in treatment can result in a relapse of the disease which is not reversible, and can ultimately lead to death. Resources BOOKS

Scheinberg, I. Herbert. “Wilson’s Disease.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, edited by Anthony S. Fauci, et al. 14th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1998. PERIODICALS

Gow, P.J., et al. “Diagnosis of Wilson’s Disease: An Experience Over Three Decades.” Gut 46(March 2000): 415-419. Hariharan, Ramesh, and L. Fred Herbert. “Wilson’s Disease.” Hospital Practice 31(August 15, 1996)556+. Robertson, W.M. “Wilson’s Disease.” Archives of Neurology 57, no. 2 (February 2000): 276-7. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

ORGANIZATIONS

American Liver Foundation. 75 Maiden Lane, Suite 603, New York, NY 10038. (800) 465-4837 or (888) 443-7222. . National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD). PO Box 8923, New Fairfield, CT 06812-8923. (203) 746-6518 or (800) 999-6673. Fax: (203) 746-6481. . Wilson’s Disease Association. 4 Navaho Dr., Brookfield, CT 06804. (800) 399-0266. OTHER

Wilson’s Disease Association. .

Katherine S. Hunt

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome Definition Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) is a rare inherited disorder marked by a low level of blood platelets, eczema, recurrent infections, and a high risk of leukemia or lymph node tumors.

Description WAS was named for the two physicians who first reported the disorder. In 1937, Dr. A. Wiskott, a physician working in Munich, described two affected boys of German ancestry who had repeated infections, a skin rash, and poor blood-clotting ability. Nearly twenty years later, Dr. R.A. Aldrich reported similar symptoms in members of an American family of Dutch ancestry. WAS is inherited as an X-linked genetic disorder and will therefore only affect males. The gene responsible for WAS is located on the short arm of the X chromosome. Since males have only one X chromosome they only have one copy of the gene. If that copy carries the abnormal gene, they will have WAS. In contrast, females have two X chromosomes. They will have a normal copy of the gene on one chromosome even if an abnormal gene is on the other because the abnormal gene is very rare. The normal copy on one X chromosome is usually sufficient to prevent females from having WAS. However, women who have one abnormal copy of the WAS gene are designated as carriers. While they will not have WAS, they have a 50% risk of passing the gene to each of their sons who will have WAS. Carrier females also have a 50% risk of passing the defective copy of the gene to their daughters who also become carriers.” 3569

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome

• interference with clotting

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome

Researchers identified the gene for WAS in 1994 and pinpointed its location on the short arm of the X chromosome. As of 2000, over 100 different mutations have been found in the gene among WAS patients. The fact that there are many mutations many explain some of the variability of symptoms among boys with WAS. However, even within the same family, affected individuals with the identical WAS gene mutation may have different degrees of severity of the disease. The mild form, X-linked thrombocytopenia, is also caused by mutations in this same gene. The WAS syndrome affects one in every 250,000 male children and occurs worldwide. In the year 2000, scientists estimated that about 500 Americans have WAS.

Causes and symptoms The syndrome is caused by a defect (mutation) in a specific gene called the WAS gene that normally codes for the protein named Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome Protein (WASP). This vital protein is a component of cells that are important in the body’s defense against infection (lymphocytes). The same protein also functions in the cells that help prevent bleeding (platelets). A less severe form of the disease, X-linked thrombocytopenia affects mainly the platelets. Increased susceptibility to infections, eczema, and excessive bleeding are the hallmarks of WAS, although the symptoms can vary signficantly from one patient to another. The immune system of patients with WAS produces too few B and T cells. B cells are the cells in the body that make antibodies. There are many types of T cells. Both B and T cells are needed to defend the body against infection. Because both types of cells are affected, WAS patients are subject to repeated infections from bacteria, fungi, and viruses. Ear infections, meningitis, and pneumonia are common in boys with WAS. WAS patients also have thrombocytopenia, a decreased number of platelets. Platelets are the specialized blood cells that help to form blood clots and prevent uncontrolled bleeding. The platelets may also be smaller than normal. Some of the earliest symptoms of the syndrome are hemorrhage from circumcision, bloody diarrhea, and a tendency to bruise very easily. Anemia and an enlarged spleen (splenomegaly) are seen in some patients. About 10% of patients develop malignancies, usually leukemia or tumors in the lymph nodes (non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma).

Diagnosis The diagnosis of WAS is usually suspected in male infants who have excessive bleeding, eczema, and fre3570

quent bacterial or viral infections. Special blood tests can then be ordered to confirm WAS. The blood of WiskottAldrich patients will show a low platelet count and a weak immune (antibody) response. It is also possible to confirm the diagnosis by obtaining a small sample of the patient’s blood and analyzing the DNA for a mutation in the WAS gene. Knowledge of the exact mutation combined with information about how much WAS protein the defective gene can produce may help predict how severe a form of the disease an individual will have. Carrier Testing If the specific WAS gene mutation is identified in an affected child, that child’s mother can then be tested to confirm that she carries the gene. Other members of the mother’s family may also want to consider testing to find out if they carry the same gene mutation. The first step in studying other family members is for a geneticist or genetic counselor to obtain a detailed family history and construct a pedigree (family tree) to determine which family members should be offered testing. Prenatal Diagnosis In families where there has been one child born with WAS, prenatal testing should be offered in subsequent pregnancies. There 50% chance with each subsequent pregnancy that the mother, who is a carrier, will transmit the abnormal copy of the gene to her baby. The key is to first identify the particular WAS gene mutation in the child with WAS. Then, early in a pregnancy, cells can be obtained from the developing fetus by chorionic villus sampling or amniocentesis, and checked for the same mutation. Women who carry the abnormal WAS gene and are considering prenatal diagnosis should discuss the risks and benefits of this type of testing with a geneticist or genetic counselor.

Treatment Standard treatments for individuals with WAS include antibiotics for infections and platelet transfusions to limit bleeding. Immune globulin is given to strengthen the individual’s immune system. Eczema can be treated with corticosteroid creams applied directly to the skin. The spleen is sometimes removed to reduce the risk of bleeding. In individuals with WAS, however, removal of the spleen also increases the risk of infection unless antibiotics are given to prevent infections. About 50% of individuals with WAS are helped by treatment with transfer factor, which is a substance derived from the T cells of a healthy person. Transfer factor is given to improve both blood clotting and immune functions. Bone marrow transplantation has been successful in a GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Amniocentesis—A procedure performed at 16-18 weeks of pregnancy in which a needle is inserted through a woman’s abdomen into her uterus to draw out a small sample of the amniotic fluid from around the baby. Either the fluid itself or cells from the fluid can be used for a variety of tests to obtain information about genetic disorders and other medical conditions in the fetus. Anemia—A blood condition in which the level of hemoglobin or the number of red blood cells falls below normal values. Common symptoms include paleness, fatigue, and shortness of breath. Chorionic villus biopsy—A procedure used for prenatal diagnosis at 10-12 weeks gestation. Under ultrasound guidance a needle is inserted either through the mother’s vagina or abdominal wall and a sample of cells is collected from around the early embryo. These cells are then tested for chromosome abnormalities or other genetic diseases. Eczema—Inflammation of the skin with redness and other variable signs such as crusts, watery discharge, itching. Gene—A building block of inheritance, which contains the instructions for the production of a particular protein, and is made up of a molecular sequence

number of cases. It has been most successful in boys under five years of age where the donor is a sibling whose tissue type closely matches that of the individual with WAS. As of 2000, attempts were also being made to treat individuals with WAS with umbilical cord blood from unrelated newborns in cases where the individual diagnosed with WAS has no matched sibling donor.

Prognosis The prognosis for males diagnosed with WiskottAdrich syndrome is poor. The average individual lives about four years; those who survive into adolescence often develop cancer. Death usually occurs from severe bleeding or overwhelming infection in the first few years of life. Resources BOOKS

Belmont, J. W., and J. M. Puck. “T Cell and Combined Immunodeficiency Disorders.” In The Metabolic & Molecular GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

found on a section of DNA. Each gene is found on a precise location on a chromosome. Immune system—A major system of the body that produces specialized cells and substances that interact with and destroy foreign antigens that invade the body. Mutation—A permanent change in the genetic material that may alter a trait or characteristic of an individual, or manifest as disease, and can be transmitted to offspring. Platelets—Small disc-shaped structures that circulate in the blood stream and participate in blood clotting. Prenatal diagnosis—The determination of whether a fetus possesses a disease or disorder while it is still in the womb. Syndrome—A group of signs and symptoms that collectively characterize a disease or disorder. Thrombocytopenia—A persistent decrease in the number of blood platelets usually associated with hemorrhaging. X-linked—Located on the X chromosome, one of the sex chromosomes. X-linked genes follow a characteristic pattern of inheritance from one generation to the next.

Bases of Inherited Disease, edited by C. R. Scriver, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001. PERIODICALS

Kuska, B. “Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome: Molecular Pieces Slide Into Place.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 92 (January 5, 2000): 9-11. ORGANIZATIONS

Immune Deficiency Foundation. 40 W. Chesapeake Ave., Suite 308, Towson, MD 21204. (800) 296-4433. Fax: (410) 321-9165. . OTHER

NORD—National Organization for Rare Disorders, Inc. . “Entry 301000: Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome.” OMIM—Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man. .

Sallie Boineau Freeman, PhD 3571

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome

KEY TERMS

Withdrawal syndromes

Withdrawal syndromes Definition Withdrawal syndrome occurs in drug and alcohol addicted individuals who discontinue or reduce the use of their drug of choice. This process of eliminating drugs and alcohol from the body is known as detoxification. Anxiety, insomnia, nausea, perspiration, body aches, and tremors are just a few of the physical and psychological symptoms of drug and alcohol withdrawal that may occur during detoxification.

Description Drugs and alcohol affect mood by altering brain chemistry, specifically the production of neurotransmitters. Neurotransmitters are chemicals in the central nervous system that enable nerve impulses to travel through the central nervous system and regulate thought processes, behavior, and emotion. Drugs that temporarily elevate neurotransmitter levels are called stimulants. Drugs that decrease neurotransmitter levels and depress the central nervous system are called depressants; they include opiates and sedative-hypnotic drugs such as alcohol and barbiturates. (There are exceptions: Benzodiazepine elevates the level of an inhibitory neurotransmitter, GABA, therefore it serves as a tranquilizer) When drug or alcohol consumption becomes chronic, the body adjusts to the constant presence of the substance by changing its normal production of neurotransmitters. If drug and alcohol use suddenly stops, the body and central nervous system react to the absence of the substance with an array of symptoms known collectively as withdrawal syndrome.

Causes and symptoms Acute withdrawal syndrome begins within hours of abstinence, and includes a full range of physical and psychological symptoms. More long-term, or subacute, withdrawal symptoms, such as intense drug craving, may occur weeks or months after detoxification has taken place. Alcohol withdrawal Alcohol withdrawal syndrome occurs in alcoholdependent individuals who suddenly stop or dramatically reduce their alcohol intake. The onset of the syndrome is likely to occur within a week, but usually occurs within 24 hours of the individual’s last drink, and is triggered when the central nervous system attempts to adjust to the sudden absence of ethyl alcohol in the body. Symptoms may include extreme anxiety, disorientation, hallucinations, 3572

sleep disorders, hand tremors, nausea, sweating, seizures, and racing pulse. Delirium tremens (DTs) are an extreme example of withdrawal. In the worst cases, untreated alcohol withdrawal syndrome can result in death. Barbiturate withdrawal Barbiturates are prescribed as anticonvulsants, sedatives, and general anesthetics. They can also mimic some of the characteristics of alcohol intoxication (including euphoria, elation, and uninhibited behavior), which make them candidates for abuse. Commonly abused barbiturates include amobarbital (Amytal), pentobarbital (Nembutal), and secobarbital (Seconal). These drugs depress the respiratory and nervous system functions; and, because abusers rapidly build up a tolerance to the effects of the drug, fatal overdose or coma can easily occur. Symptoms of withdrawal syndrome appear 12-20 hours after the last dose; they include anxiety, irritability, elevated heart and respiration rate, muscle pain, nausea, tremors, hallucinations, confusion, and seizures. Death is a possibility if the condition is left untreated. Because barbiturates decrease REM sleep (rapid eye movement sleep, during which dreaming takes place), withdrawal often results in sleep disruptions such as nightmares, insomnia, or vivid dreaming. Opiate withdrawal Opiates are powerfully addictive analgesic drugs that deaden nerve pathways related to pain. Abusers of propoxyphene (Darvon), meperidine (Demerol), percocet (Oxycodone), heroin, morphine, and other powerfully addictive opiates quickly build up a tolerance to the drugs and need progressively larger doses to achieve the desired effect. Stopping or reducing the intake of the drug can cause severe withdrawal symptoms, which begin six to eight hours after the last dosage. Symptoms are flu-like, and include gastrointestinal distress, anxiety, nausea, insomnia, muscle pain, fevers, sweating, and runny nose and eyes. Stimulant withdrawal Use of stimulants, such as cocaine, crack, amphetamines, and methamphetamines, cause an increase in neurotransmitters in the central nervous system and produce feelings of alertness and increased energy. This initial “rush” is followed by a longer period of neurotransmitter loss, characterized by depression, lethargy, and a craving for more stimulants—sometimes called a rebound effect. When a stimulant-dependent individual abstains from stimulant use, withdrawal symptoms, including depression, fatigue, insomnia, and loss of appetite, reflect this drop in neurotransmitter levels. Withdrawal typically takes one to two weeks. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

A detailed history of the patient’s drug or alcohol use taken before detoxification can be helpful in predicting the severity of withdrawal symptoms. Standardized clinical tests, such as the Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol, revised, (CIWA-Ar), are used to evaluate the severity of withdrawal symptoms throughout the detoxification procedure.

Treatment Pharmacologic and medical management is often recommended for withdrawal syndrome. The physical condition of the patient is closely monitored throughout the detoxification procedure. Alcohol withdrawal Alcohol withdrawal syndrome can be treated at home or in a hospital or treatment setting. Inpatient treatment is recommended for patients who are at risk for serious withdrawal symptoms or re-intoxication if treated as an outpatient. Withdrawal symptoms are minimized through the administration of cross-tolerant sedatives. Long-acting benzodiazepines, such as diazepam (Valium), chlordiazepoxide (Librium), and lorazepam (Ativan), are the pharmacologic treatment of choice in managing the symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. Drug dosage is adjusted to offset the discomfort of withdrawal, without causing a euphoric effect, and is then gradually decreased as withdrawal symptoms lessen. Barbiturate withdrawal Because the risk for seizures and other severe complications is high, barbiturate withdrawal should be monitored in a hospital setting. Patients are given low doses of phenobarbital at a regular interval until mild intoxication is achieved. The dosage amount and frequency is then gradually decreased until withdrawal is complete. Opiate withdrawal Two basic treatment approaches are used for managing opiate withdrawal. The first involves treating the symptoms of the withdrawal with appropriate medication. Clondine, an antihypertensive drug, is commonly prescribed to reduce muscle pain and cramping. Other symptom-specific drugs are administered on an as-needed basis. The second treatment option is to replace the patient’s drug of choice with methadone, a long-acting, cross-tolerant opiate that does not normally produce a “high.” Doses of methadone are administered every four to six hours. The patient’s reaction is closely observed, and dosages are slowly decreased until withdrawal sympGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Analgesics—Pain killing drugs that depress respiratory function. Opiates are analgesics. Antagonist—A substance that tends to nullify the action of another. Benzodiazepines—Sedatives used to treat anxiety, epilepsy, and alcohol withdrawal syndrome. Diazepam (Valium), alprazolam (Xanax), and chlordiazepoxide (Librium) are all benzodiazepines. Cross-tolerant—A drug that has the same pharmacological effect as another is considered cross-tolerant. Cross-tolerant drugs are often used in treating withdrawal syndromes. Detoxification—The process of physically eliminating drugs and/or alcohol from the system of a substance-dependent individual. Dysphoria—A depressed and anxious mood state. Neurotransmitters—Chemicals in the brain that affect the nervous system and alter thinking patterns. Opiates—Analgesic, pain killing drugs, such as heroin and morphine that depress the central nervous system.

toms have disappeared, and dosages are then discontinued. Methadone withdrawal can be completed within three weeks. It is important to note that methadone withdrawal treatment differs from a methadone maintenance program, in which patients who are unwilling to give up opiates are prescribed methadone as a legal, long-term substitute for their drug of choice. Rapid opiate detoxification (ROD) is an emerging treatment option for opiate withdrawal. The ROD method is reported to be faster and to cause less physical discomfort than traditional forms of opiate detoxification. The treatment is typically performed in a hospital or private clinic setting. Naltrexone, an opiate antagonistic that blocks opiate receptors and reverses the effects of opiates, is administered to trigger the withdrawal response. Clonidine is given simultaneously to ease the symptoms of withdrawal. The patient is anesthetized throughout the three to four hour procedure, and withdrawal occurs while the patient sleeps. Vital signs are monitored closely and a ventilator may be employed. Stimulant withdrawal Because of the depression and dysphoria (feeling of a psychological low) related to stimulant withdrawal, 3573

Withdrawal syndromes

Diagnosis

Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome

psychological and/or medical management is critical. Treatment may include a regimen of drugs that increase neurotransmitter production.

Definition

Prognosis A closely observed, medically managed detoxification typically results in a safe and tolerable withdrawal experience for the patient. Detoxification is only a short-term solution for obtaining abstinence. An addiction treatment and long-term recovery program is necessary to achieve long-term sobriety. Without such a treatment program, the likelihood of recurrence of abuse and, therefore, the recurrence of withdrawal syndrome is high.

Prevention After detoxification, alcohol and drug dependent individuals are encouraged to maintain their abstinence through participation in substance abuse treatment or a twelve-step recovery program. Resources BOOKS

Landry, Mim J. Understanding Drugs of Abuse: The Processes of Addiction, Treatment, and Recovery. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1994. Schuckit, Marc A. Drug and Alcohol Use: A Clinical Guide to Diagnosis and Treatment. 4th ed. New York: Plenum, 1995.

Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is an abnormality in the electrical functioning of the heart which may cause rapid heart rates. The abnormality affects the electrical signal between the atria and ventricles.

Description Blood is circulated through the heart and body by a muscular pump and valve system involving the atria and ventricles. The right atrium receives oxygen-lacking blood returning to the heart from the body. The blood is passed from the right atrium into the right ventricle, which contracts and sends blood out to the pulmonary artery. The pulmonary artery sends the blood into the lungs, where carbon dioxide is removed, and fresh oxygen is added. The left atrium receives blood with oxygen from the lungs and passes this arterial blood to the left ventricle, where it is emptied into the aorta, the main artery of the heart. These functions are directed by electrical signals within the heart. In patients afflicted with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, an abnormal pathway exists that causes additional electrical signals to pass between the atria and ventricles, possibly causing rapid heart rate.

Causes and symptoms

PERIODICALS

Barttner, Thaddeus, and Lance Gooberman. “Rapid Opiate Detoxification.” American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 22, no. 4 (Nov. 1996): 489-95. Hall, Wayne, and Deborah Zador. “The Alcohol Withdrawal Syndrome.” The Lancet 349, no. 9069 (June 1997): 1897900. ORGANIZATIONS

Alcoholics Anonymous (A.A). General Service Office. 475 Riverside Drive, New York, NY 10015. (212) 870-3400. . National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information. Center for Substance Abuse Prevention. P.O. Box 2345, Rockville, MD 20847-2345. (800) 729-6686. . National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence. 12 West 21st St., New York, NY 10010. (800) 622-2255. . National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA). 6000 Executive Boulevard, Willco Building, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-7003. .

Paula Anne Ford-Martin 3574

Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome

Congenital heart disease may contribute to this and other arrhythmias. Ebstein’s anomaly, a congenital heart defect that involves displacement of the tricuspid valve, located on the right side of the heart, is one known cause of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. This anomaly allows blood to flow via the small hole to the other side of the heart. Often, there is no known cause for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. Many people with the syndrome have no symptoms. On the other hand, some people experience temporary rapid heartbeat due to certain drugs, smoking, and anxiety.

Diagnosis Electrocardiography (ECG) is used to diagnose Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, and other cardiac arrhythmias. A trained physician, normally a cardiologist, can recognize patterns of electrical conduction. With this syndrome, the extra pathway will show a pattern different from those of normal conduction. If no irregular patterns show on the ECG, the patient may be GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Treatment Various drugs may be used to treat Wolff-ParkinsonWhite syndrome, as well as other cardiac arrhythmias. The purpose of these drugs is to slow the electrical signals and excitation of heart muscles. As some of these drugs may have side effects, including the rare production of new or more frequent arrhythmias, the patient should be carefully observed. Ablative therapies may be accomplished with radiofrequency or cardiac catheters to cut through the tissue which is causing the abnormal electrical signals. At one time, only open heart surgery was used, but the procedure can be done now with local anesthesia in a special cardiac laboratory. In some cases, surgery may still be recommended to treat Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome.Young people with this syndrome may be treated more successfully with surgery, rather than enduring a lifetime of drug treatments, or the possible threat of sudden cardiac death.

KEY TERMS Ablative—Used to describe a procedure involving removal of a tissue or body part, or destruction of its funtion. Arrhythmia—Irregular heart beat. Electrocardiograph (ECG)—A test of a patient’s heartbeat that involves placing leads, or detectors, on the patient’s chest to record electrical impulses in the heart. The test will produce a strip, or picture record of the heart’s electrical function. Tachycardia—Rapid heart rate, defined as more than 100 beats per minute.

ORGANIZATIONS

American Heart Association. 7320 Greenville Ave. Dallas, TX 75231. (214) 373-6300. . National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. P.O. Box 30105, Bethesda, MD 20824-0105. (301) 251-1222. .

Teresa Norris, RN

Alternative treatment A provider may teach patients methods to help control heart rate. Relaxation techniques, acupuncture, botanical medicine, and homeopathy can all be helpful supportive therapies.

Prognosis Most patients with this syndrome can lead normal lives, even with episodes of tachycardia. In many cases, the syndrome is secondary to the underlying congenital heart defect. However, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome can cause sudden cardiac arrest in certain instances.

Prevention If the syndrome is not due to congenital heart disease, the patient may try avoiding behaviors which lead to arrhythmia, such as elimination of caffeine, alcohol, cocaine, and smoking. Resources BOOKS

Current Diagnosis. Vol. 9. Ed. Rex B. Conn, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Women’s health Definition Women’s health is the effect of gender on disease and health that encompasses a broad range of biological and psychosocial issues.

Description Women’s health is the concept that examines gender differences in health and disease states. The average life expectancy has almost doubled for women (79 years for women and 73 years for men), when compared with averages during the turn of the century. Because of the gender gap in lifespan, women comprise approximately two thirds of the population older than 65 and three fourths of the population aged 85 years and older. Currently the fastest growing group in the United States is persons aged 85 years and older. Because of gender life expectancy differences, it is estimated that at the beginning of the twenty-first century, women will outnumber men in the 85 years and older category by 3:1. The reasons for this variance are primarily due to physiological differences among men and women. 3575

Women’s health

sent home with a 24-hour heart monitor, called a Holter monitor, which will help detect intermittent occurrences. Other studies, such as the cardiac electrophysiologic study (EPS), may be ordered to pinpoint the location of the accessory pathway, and to determine a course of treatment.

Women’s health

During different phases of a women’s life cycle there are complex interactions that exist between sex hormones, physiological changes, and emotional issues. Physiological changes occur as early as embryonic development when hormones program structural differences between male and female brains. During reproductive years, sex hormones profoundly influence reproduction and development, which creates a spectrum of gender specific health issues. With advancing age and onset of menopause, women’s risk factors for disease is comparably similar to men’s. Although the same disease may affect women as men, it is thought that biological mechanisms and psychosocial differences influence the clinical course of the disease (natural history) differently in women. The number of women working has doubled within the past 50 years. The effect of work stress, new environmental exposures and multiple roles is expected to have health and social impact.

American women. Past age 45, diabetes affects about one in six women.

The leading causes of death among women are cardiovascular disease, malignant cancer, cerebrovascular disease, chronic lung disease, pneumonia/influenza, and diabetes. Additionally, women can be prone to osteoporosis, alcohol abuse, psychological disorders, human immunodeficiency virus infection, and violence.

• violence, a leading cause of death, primarily caused by a perpetrator who is or was a partner.

Heart Disease accounts for approximately a third of all deaths in women. About 250,000 women die annually of coronary heart disease or a one in three chance after age 40 years. The incidence of heart disease occurs about 10 years later in women than in men, since estrogens in premenopausal women has a protective effect. African American women are more prone to die from heart disease up to age 75. Beyond 75 years of age the propensity is reversed. Native American and Hispanic women have lower death rates from heart disease. Malignant cancers are the most common cause of premature death among women. Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death in women and the most commonly diagnosed cancer. Lung cancer, secondary to cigarette smoking is the leading cause of cancer death among women. Cerebrovascular disease, or stroked related deaths account for approximately 6% of all deaths in women and it is the third leading cause of mortality. The least common form of stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage, is the more common cause in women. The prevalence of cigarette smoking has increased greatly in women and this is correlated with pulmonary disease. Death rates for pulmonary disease including cancer and infectious causes of death are expected to rise for women. Diabetes, a leading cause of death in women is more prevalent among Hispanic, African American, and Native 3576

Women can also develop: • osteoporosis, or loss of the quantity of bone, common in postmenopausal women who have estrogen changes. • alcohol abuse, characterized by repeated usage of alcohol despite negative consequences. These women frequently do not seek treatment because of fear of consequences (i.e., loss of child custody). This disease can also have adverse affects on fertility and in the developing fetus if the mother continues to consume alcohol (fetal alcohol syndrome). • psychological disorders, such as depression and eating disorders. • acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), which represents the highest percent increase in death rates.

Causes and symptoms Cardiovascular disease can be caused by blockage of a blood vessel, high blood pressure, or a secondary complication to another disease. There may be an abnormal heart rhythm or cell death. Patients may complain of a broad spectrum of symptoms that may include pain chest discomfort, high blood pressure, or strain during physical exertion. When attempting to define the cause and symptoms of cancer, it is important to assess the type of cancer and location. Additionally, if the tumor is localized (benign) or has spread to other areas (malignant), is vital for treatment planning and overall prognosis. In cases of breast cancer there mat be a lump discovered during self-examination or mammography (special breast x rays). Cerebrovascular disease may cause tremors (shaking), loss of balance and coordination, or functional and sensation loss of some parts of the body. Patients may have sudden transient strokes that could result in temporary loss of consciousness and amnesia of the incident. Patients may also develop chronic neurological states that causing memory loss and behavioral changes (Alzheimer’s disease). Patients with pulmonary (lung) cancer may develop shortness of breath, fatigue, weight loss, worsening cough, and coughing up bright red blood with sputum. Lung infections such as pneumonia may present with high fever, weakness, difficulty breathing, and abnormal breathe sounds heard with a stethoscope during physical examination. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Osteoporosis may cause the bones to be brittle and weak. It is usually not detected until bones start to break. The alcohol abuser will continue to drink despite negative repercussions. The person may not seek treatment to evade legal and/or child custody problems. The patient may hide alcohol, or confine drinking to specific times. The disease progresses to where there may be permanent liver damage, memory blackouts and malnutrition. Depression may manifest a loss of interest and desire. Patients may have difficulty getting out of bed. They may lack motivation to work or tend to daily activities. Patients with AIDS may not have symptoms for years. When active disease occurs, patients will typically develop recurrent infections that are the usual cause of death. Domestic violence is usually associated with a perpetrator who is in a relationship with the affected person. Abuse can be manifested by physical violence and/or homicide.

Diagnosis Diagnosis can be accomplished with a history, physical examination, and specialized tests or procedures. For cardiovascular disease an electrocardiogram can determine the activity of the heart. Additional tests may include echocardiography (ultrasonic waves that generate an image), stress testing, and studies that require placing a catheter with a probe to examine the damage to heart tissue. Special tests with dyes may also be injected to enhance visualization. Cancer may be detected using specialized test called tumor makers and imaging studies such as MRI and CAT scans. Cerebrovascular disease can be detected with a complete neurological examination and specialized imaging technology. Diabetes is usually detected by a careful history presence of risk factors (obesity) and blood analysis of glucose levels. Osteoporosis can be evaluated with specialized bone densitometry. Alcohol abuse can be established by a biopsycho-social assessment and standardized tests which screen for this disorder. Psychological evaluation (such as the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, MMPI) can usually detect depression or eating disorders. AIDS can be established by a careful history, belonging to high-risk groups and Western blot analysis (examination of blood to detect the protein of human immunodeficiency virus). Violence can be established by physical signs of beating, such as cuts and bruises. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Treatment Treatment depends on the extent of disease and the present health status of the patient. Additionally, in some cases treatment may stopped at sometime, or it may altogether be refused. Treatment for cardiovascular disease may include surgical intervention and/or conservative medical treatment with medications. Diet, exercise, and weight reduction are important parameters for treatment planning. Appropriate referrals, counseling, and follow up are usually indicated. Treatment for cancer may include a combination of surgery, chemotherapy or radiation therapy. These treatment modalities may be given singly or in combination or at different times during disease progression. Cerebrovascular disease can be treated surgically and/or with medications that thin the blood. Symptomatic care may be indicated in addition to close monitoring if the patient develops disability and/or cognitive impairment. Diabetes can be treated by dietary modifications and medications, which treat abnormal levels of blood glucose (sugar). Osteoporosis can be treatment with estrogen replacement and regular vitamin/mineral intake. Alcohol abuse may require long-term therapy, inpatient treatment and medications. Community centered support group meeting are also recommended as a form of treatment maintenance. To date there is no treatment for AIDS, other than medications, that offer symptomatic relief. Alcohol abuse, psychological disorders and violence require therapy, possible medication, and community centered support group meetings.

Alternative treatment There are numerous studies which support intake od coenzyme Q10 for cardiovascular health. Studies have shown that beta-carotene and vitamin E and C have no effect for cancer. Some studies indicate positive results for reproductive health using acupuncture. Some advocates proposed certain herbs may be beneficial during menopause. According to most medical literature, further research using scientific method is vital for general acceptance.

Prognosis The prognosis depends on the extent of disease and the physical and emotional status of the patient. Prognosis is also related to tolerance of treatment, adverse drug effects, and complication during or after surgery, disease resurgence and patient compliance with treatment recommendations.

Prevention One of the most reliable measures of prevention is education and training. The Council on Graduate Medical 3577

Women’s health

Diabetes is a syndrome with disordered metabolism and high blood sugar due to an abnormality in the chemical that regulates sugar levels. It is characterized by an increased thirst, urination, and chronic skin infections.

Wound culture

KEY TERMS Electrocardiogram— An instrument that monitors heart rate and rhythm.

growth medium. It is done to find and identify the microorganism causing an infection in a wound or an abscess. If a microorganism is found, more testing is done to determine the antibiotics that will be effective in treating the infection.

Purpose Education has provided funding for numerous centers to research women health issues. On more individual level preventive and personal habits are vital for good health. Most physicians believe that a baseline physical examination is a reliable comparative tool. Women should receive counseling for special issues concerning cigarette smoking, exercise, diet, primary disease prevention, safe sexual practices, alcohol abuse, psychological disorders, and violence. Additionally, knowledge of family history is important since many diseases have a strong propensity among first-degree relatives. Blood pressure should normally be measured every other year. Screening tests for breast, cervical, and colorectal cancer is recommended. Pap smears taken during routine pelvic examinations can screen for disease processes in the reproductive tract. Serum cholesterol monitoring and reduction are advised. Patients may require postmenopausal estrogen replacement therapy and vitamin/mineral supplements. Resources BOOKS

Duthie, Edmund H., et al, eds. Practice of Geriatrics. 3rd ed. W. B. Saunders Company, 1998. Ryan, Kenneth J., et al, eds. Kistner’s Gynecology & Women’s Health. 7th ed. Mosby, Inc., 1999. PERIODICALS

Lautenbach, G. L., and M. Petri. “Women’s Health: General Medical Care of the Patient with Rheumatic Disease.” Rheumatic Diseases Clinics of North America 25 (Aug. 1999). ORGANIZATION

U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. 200 Independence Ave SW, Washington DC 20201. (877) 696-6775. .

Laith Farid Gulli, M.D. Bilal Nasser, M.Sc.

Wound culture Definition A wound culture is a laboratory test in which microorganisms from a wound are grown in a special 3578

Wounds are injuries to body tissues caused by disease processes or events such as burns, punctures, and human or animal bites. Wounds or abscesses also occur within body tissues as a result of surgery or dental procedures. Wounds become infected when microorganisms from the outside environment, or from within the person’s body, enter the open wound and multiply. A wound that is red, painful, swollen, and draining pus is probably infected. A fever following surgery indicates an infection at the site of surgery. To enable healing and prevent the spread of infection to other body tissues, the infecting microorganisms must be killed. A wound culture discovers which type of microorganism is causing the infection and the best antibiotic with which to kill it.

Description A sample of material, such as pus or a portion of tissue, is taken from the wound, placed in a sterile container, and sent to the laboratory. In the laboratory, this material is spread over the surface of several different types of culture plates and placed in an incubator at body temperature for one to two days. A Gram stain is done by staining the slide with purple and red stains, then examining it under a microscope. If many white blood cells and bacteria are seen, it is an early confirmation of infection. The color of stain retained by the bacteria (purple or red), their shape (such as round or rectangular), and their size provide valuable clues as to their identity, and help the physician predict which antibiotics might work best even before the entire test is completed. Bacteria that stain purple are called gram-positive; those that stain red are called gram-negative. Bacteria can be grouped into two categories: aerobes and anaerobes. Aerobes are bacteria that need oxygen to live; anaerobes live only where there is no oxygen. Deep wounds, closed-off from oxygen, are an ideal environment for an anaerobic infection to develop. Foulsmelling odor, gas, or gangrene at the infection site are signs of an infection caused by an anaerobic bacteria. Routine cultures typically only look for aerobic bacteria. If the physician tells the laboratory to include a culture for anaerobes, a portion of the wound sample will be put GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Bacteria present in the wound sample will multiply and appear as visible colonies on the plates, or as cloudiness in the tube of broth. They are identified by the appearance of their colonies, the results of biochemical tests, and information from Gram staining part of the bacterial colony. A sensitivity test, also called an antibiotic susceptibility test, is also done. The bacteria are tested against different antibiotics to determine which will treat the infection by killing the bacteria. If the physician thinks the wound may be infected with a mold or yeast, a fungal culture is also done. The wound sample is spread on special culture plates that are treated to encourage the growth of mold and yeast. Different biochemical tests and stains are used to identify molds and yeast. Other more unusual microorganisms, such as Mycobacterium leprae, may be the cause of a wound infection. The physician must notify the laboratory to culture specifically for these more unusual microorganisms. The initial Gram stain result is available the same day, or in less than an hour if requested by the physician. An early report, known as a preliminary report, is usually available after one day. This report will tell if any microorganisms have yet been found, and, if so, their Gram stain appearance. For example, they may have the appearance of a gram-negative rod, or a gram-positive cocci (spherical shape). The final report, usually available in one to three days, includes complete identification, an estimate of the quantity of the microorganisms, plus a list of the antibiotics to which they are sensitive. Cultures for fungi and anaerobic bacteria may take two to three weeks. Wound culture is also called soft tissue culture, abscess culture, or wound culture and sensitivity.

KEY TERMS Aerobe—Bacteria that require oxygen to live. Anaerobe—Bacteria that live only where there is no oxygen. Normal flora—The mixture of bacteria normally found at specific body sites.

The physician may choose to start the person on an antibiotic before the culture and sensitivity tests are completed. However, the specimen for culture should be collected before antibiotics are begun. Antibiotics in the person’s system may prevent microorganisms present in the wound from growing in culture, and thus not be identifiable.

Normal results A normal culture may be contaminated by a mixture of microorganisms normally found on a person’s skin (normal flora). It is not uncommon for the microorganism causing a wound infection to not grow in culture. This is particularly true if the specimen was collected with a swab rather than an aspirate or tissue biopsy.

Abnormal results Streptococcus Group A, Escherichia coli, Proteus, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter, Enterococci, Staphylococcus aureus, Bacterioides, and Clostridium, are common causes of wound infections. More than one microorganism may be the cause of the infection. Resources BOOKS

Preparation A piece of the infected tissue is the best specimen. If this is not possible, the next best specimen is pus from the wound. Because many microorganisms normally live on skin and mucous membrane, the specimen must not be allowed to touch the area surrounding the wound. The physician first cleans the surface of the wound using alcohol. Using a syringe, the physician suctions out (aspirates) as much pus as possible from the wound. Next, this is sent to the laboratory in a sterile container. If it is impossible to aspirate the pus, pus from within the wound can be collected on a swab. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Isada, Carlos M., et al. Infectious Diseases Handbook. Hudson, OH: Lexi-Comp Inc., 1995. Koneman, Elmer W., et al. Color Atlas and Textbook of Diagnostic Microbiology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co., 1992. Pagana, Kathleen Deska. Mosby’s Manual of Diagnostic and Laboratory Tests. St. Louis: Mosby, Inc., 1998. Shulman, Standford T., et al., eds. The Biologic and Clinical Basis of Infectious Diseases. 5th ed. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. PERIODICALS

Robson, Martin C. “Wound Infection. A Failure of Wound Healing Caused by an Imbalance of Bacteria.” Surgical Clinics of North America (June 1997): 637-650. 3579

Wound culture

on culture plates, or in a tube of culture broth, and incubated in a special chamber without oxygen.

Wound flushing

ORGANIZATIONS

The Wound Healing Society. 1550 South Coast Highway, Suite 201, Laguna Beach, CA 92651. (888) 434-4234. .

Nancy J. Nordenson

Wound flushing Definition Wound flushing is a method of cleaning a wound by applying pressurized water or antiseptic solutions to the tissues.

Purpose Wound flushing is used to help flush debris from a wound, lessening the risk of infection or treating an infection that already exists. If the wound is flushed with an antiseptic, it is more likely to heal correctly; flushing the wound can help prevent the surface from healing over a possibly infected area underneath.

Description Wound flushing is usually done in a hospital, though if it is performed at home, there is less chance of infection because of the higher risk of bacterial contamination in the hospital environment. Wound flushing is especially helpful in treating people with bites, lacerations, or crush injuries, which often become infected due to the presence of dead tissue and foreign debris, such as splinters or dirt. In a nonsurgical situation, the procedure is usually performed by a nurse. An acute injury, such as a crushing wound or knife cut, the wound is flushed right before the injury is stitched closed. For people with chronic wounds, such as bed sores or abscesses, the wound may be flushed periodically to treat or prevent infection. During an operation, a surgeon uses an antibacterial solution to flush the surgical site just before stitching the wound closed. After surgery, the wounds may be flushed to treat or prevent infection.

Preparation The nurse or doctor may inject the site with a local anesthetic before flushing the wound.

Aftercare After the wound is flushed, the health care provider cleans the area around the wound to guard against infec3580

KEY TERMS Antiseptic—Chemicals applied to the skin to destroy bacteria and prevent infection.

tion. Packing to absorb excess fluids may be placed into the wound, followed by a sterile bandage.

Risks Complications rarely occur, especially if the solution used to flush the wound is chosen carefully so as to avoid skin irritation. Patients should call the doctor immediately if there is any sign of infection, such as fever, pus, or swelling.

Normal results The wound will heal correctly, from the inside out, without infection. Resources BOOKS

Smeltzer, Suzanne C., and Brenda Bare. Brunner and Suddarth’s Textbook of Medical/Surgical Nursing. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Co., 1992.

Wounds Definition A wound occurs when the integrity of any tissue is compromised (e.g. skin breaks, muscle tears, burns, or bone fractures). A wound may be caused by an act, such as a gunshot, fall, or surgical procedure; by an infectious disease; or by an underlying condition.

Description Types and causes of wounds are wide ranging, and health care professionals have several different ways of classifying them. They may be chronic, such as the skin ulcers caused by diabetes mellitus, or acute, such as a gunshot wound or animal bite. Wounds may also be referred to as open, in which the skin has been compromised and underlying tissues are exposed, or closed, in which the skin has not been compromised, but trauma to underlying structures has occurred (e.g. a bruised rib or GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Wounds

cerebral contusion). Emergency personnel and first-aid workers generally place acute wounds in one of eight categories: • Abrasions. Also called scrapes, they occur when the skin is rubbed away by friction against another rough surface (e.g. rope burns and skinned knees). • Avulsions. Occur when an entire structure or part of it is forcibly pulled away, such as the loss of a permanent tooth or an ear lobe. Explosions, gunshots, and animal bites may cause avulsions. • Contusions. Also called bruises, these are the result of a forceful trauma that injures an internal structure without breaking the skin. Blows to the chest, abdomen, or head with a blunt instrument (e.g. a football or a fist) can cause contusions. • Crush wounds. Occur when a heavy object falls onto a person, splitting the skin and shattering or tearing underlying structures. • Cuts. Slicing wounds made with a sharp instrument, leaving even edges. They may be as minimal as a paper cut or as significant as a surgical incision. • Lacerations. Also called tears, these are separating wounds that produce ragged edges. They are produced by a tremendous force against the body, either from an internal source as in childbirth, or from an external source like a punch. • Missile wounds. Also called velocity wounds, they are caused by an object entering the body at a high speed, typically a bullet. • Punctures. Deep, narrow wounds produced by sharp objects such as nails, knives, and broken glass.

Causes and symptoms Acute wounds have a wide range of causes. Often, they are the unintentional results of motor vehicle accidents, falls, mishandling of sharp objects, or sports-related injury. Wounds may also be an intentional result of violence involving assault with weapons, including fists, knives, or guns. The general symptoms of a wound are localized pain and bleeding. Specific symptoms include: • An abrasion usually appears as lines of scraped skin with tiny spots of bleeding. • An avulsion has heavy, rapid bleeding and a noticeable absence of tissue. • A contusion may appear as a bruise beneath the skin or may appear only on imaging tests; an internal wound may also generate symptoms such as weakness, perspiration, and pain. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

A close-up of a hard-contact gunshot wound with accompanying burn marks on the left and right sides of the wound. (Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

• A crush wound may have irregular margins like a laceration; however, the wound will be deeper and trauma to muscle and bone may be apparent. • A cut may have little or profuse bleeding depending on its depth and length; its even edges readily line up. • A laceration too may have little or profuse bleeding; the tissue damage is generally greater and the wound’s ragged edges do not readily line up. • A missile entry wound may be accompanied by an exit wound, and bleeding may be profuse, depending on the nature of the injury. • A puncture wound will be greater than its length, therefore there is usually little bleeding around the outside of the wound and more bleeding inside, causing discoloration.

Diagnosis A diagnosis is made by visual examination and may be confirmed by a report of the causal events. Medical personnel will also assess the extent of the wound and what effect it has had on the patient’s well being (e.g. profound blood loss, damage to the nervous system or skeletal system).

Treatment Treatment of wounds involves stopping any bleeding, then cleaning and dressing the wound to prevent infection. Additional medical attention may be required if the effects of the wound have compromised the body’s ability to function effectively. Stopping the bleeding Most bleeding may be stopped by direct pressure. Direct pressure is applied by placing a clean cloth or 3581

Wounds

KEY TERMS

A defensive hand wound from a knife attack. (Photograph by D. Willoughby, Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced by permission.)

dressing over the wound and pressing the palm of the hand over the entire area. This limits local bleeding without disrupting a significant portion of the circulation. The cloth absorbs blood and allows clot formation; the clot should not be disturbed, so if blood soaks through the cloth, another cloth should be placed directly on top rather than replacing the original cloth. If the wound is on an arm or leg that does not appear to have a broken bone, the wound should be elevated to a height above the person’s heart while direct pressure is applied. Elevating the wound allows gravity to slow down the flow of blood to that area. If severe bleeding cannot be stopped by direct pressure or with elevation, the next step is to apply pressure to the major artery supplying blood to the area of the wound. In the arm, pressure would be applied to the brachial artery by pressing the inside of the upper arm against the bone. In the leg, pressure would be applied to the femoral artery by pressing on the inner crease of the groin against the pelvic bone. If the bleeding from an arm or leg is so extreme as to be life-threatening and if it cannot be stopped by any other means, a tourniquet may be required. However, in the process of limiting further blood loss, the tourniquet also drastically deprives the limb tissues of oxygen. As a result, the patient may live but the limb may die. Dressing the wound Once the bleeding has been stopped, cleaning and dressing the wound is important for preventing infection. Although the flowing blood flushes debris from the wound, running water should also be used to rinse away dirt. Embedded particles such as wood slivers and glass splinters, if not too deep, may be removed with a needle or pair of tweezers that has been sterilized in rubbing 3582

Abrasion—Also called a scrape. The rubbing away of the skin surface by friction against another rough surface. Avulsion—The forcible separation of a piece from the entire structure. Butterfly bandage—A narrow strip of adhesive with wider flaring ends (shaped like butterfly wings) used to hold the edges of a wound together while it heals. Cut—Separation of skin or other tissue made by a sharp edge, producing regular edges. Laceration—Also called a tear. Separation of skin or other tissue by a tremendous force, producing irregular edges. Plasma—The straw-colored fluid component of blood, without the other blood cells. Puncture—An injury caused by a sharp, narrow object deeply penetrating the skin. Tourniquet—A device used to control bleeding, consisting of a constricting band applied tightly around a limb above the wound. It should only be used if the bleeding in life-threatening and can not be controlled by other means. Traumatic shock—A condition of depressed body functions as a reaction to injury with loss of body fluids or lack of oxygen. Signs of traumatic shock include weak and rapid pulse, shallow and rapid breathing, and pale, cool, clammy skin. Whole blood—Blood which contains red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets in plasma.

alcohol or in the heat of a flame. Once the wound has been cleared of foreign material and washed, it should be gently blotted dry, with care not to disturb the blood clot. An antibiotic ointment may be applied. The wound should then be covered with a clean dressing and bandaged to hold the dressing in place. Getting medical assistance A person who has become impaled on a fixed object, such as a fence post or a stake in the ground, should only be moved by emergency medical personnel. Foreign objects embedded in the eye should only be removed by a doctor. Larger penetrating objects, such as a fishhook or an arrow, should only be removed by a doctor to prevent further damage as they exit. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Wounds

Abrasion

Incision

Laceration

Puncture

Avulsion

Amputation

Examples of open wounds. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

Additional medical attention is necessary in several instances. Wounds which penetrate the muscle beneath the skin should be cleaned and treated by a doctor. Such a wound may require stitches to keep it closed during healing. Some deep wounds which do not extend to the underlying muscle may only require butterfly bandages to keep them closed during healing. Wounds to the face and neck, even small ones, should always be examined and treated by a doctor to preserve sensory function and minimize scarring. Deep wounds to the hands and wrists should be examined for nerve and tendon damage. Puncture wounds may require a tetanus shot to prevent serious infection. Animal bites should always be examined and the possibility of rabies infection determined. Infection Wounds which develop signs of infection should also be brought to a doctor’s attention. Signs of infection are swelling, redness, tenderness, throbbing pain, localized warmth, fever, swollen lymph glands, the presence of pus either in the wound or draining from it, and red streaks spreading away from the wound. Emergency treatment With even as little as one quart of blood lost, a person may lose consciousness and go into traumatic shock. Because this is life-threatening, emergency medical assistance should be called immediately. If the person stops breathing, artificial respiration (also called mouth-tomouth resuscitation or rescue breathing) should be administered. In the absence of a pulse, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) must be performed. Once the person is breathing unassisted, the bleeding may be attended to. In cases of severe blood loss, medical treatment may include the intravenous replacement of body fluids. This GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

may be infusion with saline or plasma, or a transfusion of whole blood.

Alternative treatment In addition to the conventional treatments described above, there are alternative therapies that may help support the injured person. Homeopathy can be very effective in acute wound situations. Ledum (Ledum palustre) is recommended for puncture wounds (taken internally). Calendula (Calendula officinalis) is the primary homeopathic remedy for wounds. An antiseptic, it is used topically as a succus (juice), tea, or salve. Another naturally occurring antiseptic is tea tree oil (Melaleuca spp.), which can be mixed with water for cleaning wounds. Aloe (Aloe barbadensis) can be applied topically to soothe skin during healing. When wounds affect the nerves, especially in the arms and legs, St.-John’s-wort (Hypericum perforatum) can be helpful when taken internally or applied topically. Acupuncture can help support the healing process by restoring the energy flow in the meridians that have been affected by the wound. In some cases, vitamin E taken orally or applied topically can speed healing and prevent scarring.

Prognosis Without the complication of infection, most wounds heal well with time. Depending on the depth and size of the wound, it may or may not leave a visible scar.

Prevention Most actions that result in wounds are preventable. Injuries from motor vehicle accidents may be reduced by wearing seat belts and placing children in size-appropriate car seats in the back seat. Sharp, jagged, or pointed objects or machinery parts should be used according to 3583

Wounds

the manufacturer’s instructions and only for their intended purpose. Firearms and explosives should be used only by adults with explicit training; they should also be kept locked and away from children. Persons engaging in sports, games, and recreational activities should wear all proper protective equipment and follow safety rules.

The Editors of Time-Life Books. The Medical Advisor: The Complete Guide to Alternative and Conventional Treatments. Alexandria, VA: Time Life, Inc., 1996. ORGANIZATIONS

American Red Cross. P.O. Box 37243, Washington, D.C. 20013. .

Bethany Thivierge Carol A. Turkington

Resources BOOKS

American Red Cross Staff. Standard First Aid. St. Louis: Mosby Yearbook, 1992.

3584

Wryneck see Torticollis

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

X X-linked agammaglobulinemia Definition X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) or Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia is present at birth (congenital) and is characterized by low or completely absent levels of immunoglobulins in the bloodstream. Immunoglobulins are protein molecules in blood serum that function like antibodies. Without them, the body lacks a fully functioning immune system. Persons with XLA are vulnerable to repeated, potentially fatal bacterial infections.

Description XLA occurs in one in 50,000 to one in 100,000 newborns. Almost all persons with the disorder are males. Although persons with XLA carry the genes to produce immunoglobulins, a genetic defect on the X chromosome prevents their formation. This defect is not associated with the immunoglobulins themselves, but rather with the B cells in the bloodstream that ordinarily secrete the immunoglobulins. B cells are a type of white blood cell. They are the sole producers of immunoglobulins in the body. B cells are produced in the bone marrow and carried to the spleen, lymph nodes, and other organs as they mature. The maturation process depends on an enzyme called Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase (Btk). If Btk is missing or defective, the B cells cannot mature and cannot produce immunoglobulins. The gene for Btk is on the X chromosome. Certain changes (mutations) in this gene result in defective Btk. Since the gene is carried on the X chromosome, XLA individuals are almost always male. Females have two X chromosomes, which means they have two copies of the Btk gene, one of which is normal. Males have only one X chromosome. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Causes and symptoms XLA is caused by a defect in the gene that codes for Btk. This defect leads to blocked maturation of B cells, the cells that produce immunoglobulins. Because other portions of the immune system are functional, people with XLA can fight off some types of infection, such as fungal and most viral infections. Immunoglobulins, however, are vital to combat bacterial infections. Infants with XLA usually do not show symptoms during the first six months of life because immunoglobulins from their mothers are circulating in their bloodstreams. As the mother’s supply decreases, the baby becomes increasingly vulnerable to bacterial infections. Common symptoms of immunoglobulin deficiency appear after the infant is six months old. They include frequent ear and sinus infections, pneumonia, and gastroenteritis. Certain viruses, such as hepatitis and polio viruses, can also pose a threat. Children with XLA grow slowly, have small tonsils and lymph nodes, and may develop chronic skin infections. Approximately 20% of these children develop arthritis, possibly as a result of joint infections.

Diagnosis Frequent bacterial infections, a lack of mature B cells, and low-to-nonexistent levels of immunoglobulins point to a diagnosis of XLA. A sample of the infant’s blood serum can be analyzed for the presence of immunoglobulins by a technique called immunoelectrophoresis. To make a definitive diagnosis, the child’s X chromosome is analyzed for defects in the Btk gene. Similar analysis can be used for prenatal diagnosis or to detect carriers of the defective gene.

Treatment Treatment of XLA consists of regular intravenous doses of commercially prepared gamma globulin (sold under the trade names Gamimune or Gammagard) to 3585

X rays of the orbit

Resources

KEY TERMS Antibody—A molecule that is produced by the immune system in response to a protein, called an antigen, that is not recognized as belonging in the body. B cell—A type of lymphocyte, or white blood cell, that is a key component of the body’s immune system. Mature B cells produce immunoglobulins. Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia tyrosine kinase (Btk)—An enzyme vital for the maturation of B cells. Carrier—A person who has a genetic defect but does not develop any symptoms or signs of the defect. The carrier’s offspring may inherit the defect and develop the associated disorder. Enzyme—A protein molecule that prompts rapid biochemical reactions. Immunoglobulin—A protein molecule formed by mature B cells in response to foreign proteins in the body. There are five types of immunoglobulins, but the major one is gamma globulin or immunoglobulin G. Mutation—A change in a gene that alters the function or other characteristics of the gene’s product. X chromosome—One of the two sex chromosomes (the other is Y) that determine a person’s gender. Normal males have both an X and a Y chromosome, and normal females have two X chromosomes.

BOOKS

Barrett, Douglas J., et al. “Antibody Deficiency Diseases.” In The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease. 7th ed. Ed. Charles R. Scriver, et al. New York: McGrawHill, Inc., 1995. Physicians’ Guide to Rare Diseases. Ed. Jess G. Thoene. Montvale, NJ: Dowden Publishing Co., Inc., 1995. “X-Linked Infantile Hypogammaglobulinemia.” In Professional Guide to Diseases, ed. Stanley Loeb, et al. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corporation, 1991. PERIODICALS

Ochs, Hans D., and C. I. Edvard Smith. “X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia: A Clinical and Molecular Analysis.” Medicine 75 (1996): 287. Sideras, Paschalis, and C. I. Edvard Smith. “Molecular and Cellular Aspects of X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia.” Advances in Immunology 59 (1995): 135. ORGANIZATIONS

Immune Deficiency Foundation. 25 W. Chesapeake Ave., Suite 206, Towson, MD 21204. (800) 296-4433. . National Organization for Rare Disorders. P.O. Box 8923, New Fairfield, CT 06812-8923. (800) 999-6673. .

Julia Barrett

X rays of the eye’s orbit see X rays of the orbit

X rays of the orbit ward off infections. Antibiotics are used to treat infections as they occur. Children with XLA must be treated promptly for even minor cuts and scrapes, and taught to avoid crowds and people with active infections.

Prognosis Prior to the era of gamma globulin and antibiotic treatment, approximately 90% of XLA individuals died before age 8. Early diagnosis and current therapy allows most individuals with XLA to reach adulthood and lead relatively normal lives. Infants who develop polio or persistent viral infections, however, have a poorer prognosis.

Prevention Parents of a child with XLA should consider genetic counseling if they are planning to have more children. 3586

Definition Orbital x rays are studies of the area and structures containing the eye. The orbit is the circle of thin bones that houses and protects the eye, even extending behind the eye and nearly wrapping around it. The orbit includes the eyebrow, the bridge of the nose and the cheekbone. X rays are a form of radiation (like light) that can penetrate body tissues.

Purpose Orbital x ray, or orbital radiography, is often used to detect problems resulting from injury or trauma to the eye. The exam may also detect changes to the structure of the eye, which may indicate various diseases. An ophthalmologist may also order an orbital x ray if there is concern that foreign bodies may be present in the eye that cannot be detected with an instrument called an ophthalmoscope. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Pregnant women and women who could possibly be pregnant should only receive orbital x rays when absolutely necessary. If the patient is in severe pain due to injury or trauma, a painkiller may be given to help ease discomfort during positioning of the head throughout the exam. No other precautions are necessary for orbital x rays.

Description Each orbit is composed of a floor, a roof, a medial (in the center plane) and lateral (sides of the plane) walls. The orbital x ray involves several different views in order for the physician to clearly see various parts of the eye without obstruction. In orbital x rays, images of the unaffected eye may also be taken to compare its shapes and structures to those of the affected eye. Views may include side view (lateral), back to front (posteroanterior), base view, views from both sides, and an image from the center to one outside edge (half-axial projection). Projections of the optical canal will also be included. For all of these views, the patient may be seated upright or asked to lie on a table in the x ray room. The orbital x ray procedure should take about 15 minutes to complete. Following the procedure, the patient will usually be asked to wait until the films are developed to ensure they are high enough quality and that repeat x rays are not necessary. A physician may perform the x ray exam in his or her office, or refer the patient to an outpatient radiology facility or hospital radiology department. In the case of emergency, the exam may be performed in the emergency room or a nearby radiology area of the hospital.

Preparation There are no special dietary preparations needed prior to an orbital x ray. As with any radiography procedure, the patient should remove any jewelry or metal objects, which may interfere with a clear image.

Aftercare No aftercare is required following this diagnostic test.

Risks Radiation exposure is low for this procedure and all certified radiology facilities follow strict personnel and equipment guidelines for radiation protection. Women of child bearing age and children should be offered protective shielding (lead aprons) to cover the genital and/or abdominal areas. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

KEY TERMS Blowout fracture—A fracture or break in the orbit that is caused by sudden and violent impact to the area. Malignancy—A malignancy is a tumor that is cancerous and growing. Medial wall—The middle bone, or wall of the eye’s orbit. It is generally thicker than the roof and floor walls. Ophthalmologist—A physician who specializes in the workings, structures and care of the eyes. Ophthalmoscope—An instrument routinely used by ophthalmologists to examine the interior of the eye. It consists of a small light, a mirror, and lenses of differing powers that magnify. Radiography—Examination of any part of the body through the use of x rays. The process produces an image of shadows and contrasts on film. X ray—A form of electromagnetic radiation with shorter wavelengths than normal light. X rays can penetrate most structures.

Normal results Normal findings will show the bones of the orbit intact, and will show similarity between the orbit that is being studied and the unaffected orbit.

Abnormal results Positive findings from an orbital x ray may show that there has been injury to the eye. Certains signs may indicate some disease that is affecting the orbital structures. Tiny fractures in the orbital bones can usually be detected on the radiograph. The floor bone, the medial wall and the ethmoid bone, which is a spongy bone that forms the upper part of the nasal cavity, are the most likely to break. In a blowout fracture (one involving the orbital floor), radiographic findings may include disruption to the orbital floor, an opaque look to the sinuses on the same side as the affected orbit (due to hemorrhage) or signs of sinus problems from the orbital root’s interference. These indications can be seen in most typical orbital x ray views. Since the physician examines both orbits side by side, indications of differences in size and shape of the various structures in the orbit may be apparent. The orbit may be enlarged, indicating irritation from an injury or 3587

X rays of the orbit

Precautions

X rays of the orbit

foreign body. A number of growing tumors within the eye or brain area may also cause orbital enlargement. Destruction of the walls of the orbit may indicate a nearby infection or malignancy. Changes in density of the tiny orbit bones may also be a sign of bone disease or cancer spread to bone.

National Eye Institute. 2020 Vision Place, Bethesda, MD 20892-3655. (301) 496-5248. . American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street, P.O. Box 7424, San Francisco, CA 94120-7424. .

Children’s orbits are more likely to be enlarged by a fast growing lesion, since their orbital bones have not fully developed.

Scgeue Eye Institute. University of Pennsylvania Health System .

Resources

Xerophthalmia see Vitamin A deficiency Xerostomia see Dry mouth XLA see X-linked agammaglobulinemia

BOOKS

Illustrated Guide to Diagnostic Tests. Ed. J. A. Lewis. Springhouse, PA: Springhouse Corp. 1994.

OTHER

Teresa Norris, RN

ORGANIZATIONS

American Academy of Ophthalmology. 655 Beach Street, P.O. Box 7424, San Francisco, CA 94120-7424. .

3588

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Y Yaws Definition Yaws is a chronic illness which first affects the skin, and then affects the bones.

patient to walk in an odd and characteristic fashion on the sides of his or her feet (nicknamed “crab yaws”). More destructive tumors may then disrupt the bones of the face, the jaw, and the lower leg. Ulcers around the nose and on the face may be very mutilating.

Diagnosis Description Yaws tends to strike children, particularly between the ages of two and five. It is common in areas where poverty and overcrowding interfere with good hygiene practices. The most common locations are in rural areas throughout Africa, Southeast Asia, and in locations bordering the equator in the Americas.

Causes and symptoms Yaws is caused by a spiral-shaped bacterium (spirochete) called Treponema pertenue. This bacterium belongs to the same family as the bacterium that causes syphilis. Yaws is passed among people by direct skin contact. It requires some kind of a scratched or insect bitten area in order for the bacteria to actually settle in and cause infection. An injured spot on the leg is the most common part of the body through which the bacteria enter. Young children, who are constantly bumping themselves in play, who wear little clothing, who do not wash their hands often, and who may frequently put their hands in their mouths, are particularly susceptible. The first symptom of yaws occurs three to four weeks after acquiring the bacteria. The area where the bacteria originally entered the skin becomes a noticeable bump (papule). The papule grows larger and develops a punched-out center (ulcer), covered with a yellow crust. Lymph nodes in the area may become swollen and tender. This first papule may take as long as six months to heal. Secondary soft, gummy growths then appear on the face, arms and legs, and buttocks. These soft, tumor-like masses may grow on the soles of the feet, causing the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Samples taken from the first papules may be examined using a technique called dark-field microscopy. This often allows the spirochetes to be identified. They may also be identified in fluid withdrawn from swollen lymph nodes. Various tests can also be run on blood samples to determine if an individual is producing antibodies (special immune cells) which are specifically made in response to the presence of these spirochetes.

Treatment A single penicillin injection in a muscle is sufficient to completely end the disease.

Prognosis Without treatment, yaws is a terribly disfiguring chronic illness. With appropriate treatment, the progression of the disease can be completely halted.

Prevention For a time, the World Health Organization (WHO) was working to totally eradicate yaws, just as smallpox was successfully eradicated. This has not occurred, however. WHO continues to work to identify and respond to outbreaks quickly, in an effort to at least slow the spread of yaws. Resources BOOKS

Perine, Peter L. “Endemic Treponematoses.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. 3589

Yellow fever

KEY TERMS Papule—A raised bump on the skin. Ulcer—A punched-out, irritated pit on the skin.

Sherris, John C., and James J. Plorde. “Spirochetes.” In Sherris Medical Microbiology: An Introduction to Infectious Diseases. 3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. ORGANIZATIONS

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404) 639-3311. .

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD

Yellow fever Definition Yellow fever is a severe infectious disease, caused by a virus called a “flavivirus.” This flavivirus can cause outbreaks of epidemic proportions throughout Africa and tropical America. The first written evidence of such an epidemic occurred in the Yucatan in 1648. Since that time, much has been learned about the interesting transmission patterns of this devastating illness.

Description In order to understand how yellow fever is passed, several terms need to be defined. The word “host” refers to an animal that can be infected with a particular disease. The term “vector” refers to an organism which can carry a particular disease-causing agent (such as a virus or bacteria) without actually developing the disease. The vector can then pass the virus or bacteria on to a new host. Many of the common illnesses in the United States (including the common cold, many viral causes of diarrhea, and influenza or “flu”) are spread via direct passage of the causative virus between human beings. Yellow fever, however, cannot be passed directly from one infected human being to another. Instead, the virus responsible for yellow fever requires an intermediate vector, a mosquito, which carries the virus from one host to another. The hosts of yellow fever include both humans and monkeys. The cycle of yellow fever transmission occurs as follows: an infected monkey is bitten by a tree-hole 3590

breeding mosquito. This mosquito acquires the virus, and can pass the virus on to any number of other monkeys that it may bite. When a human is bitten by such a mosquito, the human may acquire the virus. In the case of South American yellow fever, the infected human may return to the city, where an urban mosquito (Aedes aegypti) serves as a viral vector, spreading the infection rapidly by biting humans.

Symptoms Once a mosquito has passed the yellow fever virus to a human, the chance of disease developing is about 520%. Infection may be fought off by the host’s immune system, or may be so mild that it is never identified. In human hosts who develop the disease yellow fever, there are five distinct stages through which the infection evolves. These have been termed the periods of incubation, invasion, remission, intoxication, and convalescence. Yellow fever’s incubation period (the amount of time between the introduction of the virus into the host and the development of symptoms) is three to six days. During this time, there are generally no symptoms identifiable to the host. The period of invasion lasts two to five days, and begins with an abrupt onset of symptoms, including fever and chills, intense headache and lower backache, muscle aches, nausea, and extreme exhaustion. The patient’s tongue shows a characteristic white, furry coating in the center, surrounded by a swollen, reddened margin. While most other infections that cause a high fever also cause an increased heart rate, yellow fever results in an unusual finding, called Faget’s sign. This is the simultaneous occurrence of a high fever with a slowed heart rate. Throughout the period of invasion, there are still live viruses circulating in the patient’s blood stream. Therefore, a mosquito can bite the ill patient, acquire the virus, and continue passing it on to others. The next phase is called the period of remission. The fever falls, and symptoms decrease in severity for several hours to several days. In some patients, this signals the end of the disease; in other patients, this proves only to be the calm before the storm. The period of intoxication represents the most severe and potentially fatal phase of the illness. During this time, lasting three to nine days, a type of degeneration of the internal organs (specifically the kidneys, liver, and heart) occurs. This fatty degeneration results in what is considered the classic triad of yellow fever symptoms: jaundice, black vomit, and the dumping of protein into the urine. Jaundice causes the whites of the patient’s eyes GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Patients who survive the period of intoxication enter into a relatively short period of convalescence. They recover with no long term effects related to the yellow fever infection. Further, infection with the yellow fever virus results in lifelong immunity against repeated infection with the virus.

KEY TERMS Epidemic—A situation in which a particular disease spreads rapidly through a population of people in a relatively short period of time. Faget’s sign—The simultaneous occurrence of a high fever with a slowed heart rate. Host—The organism (such as a monkey or human) in which another organism (such as a virus or bacteria) is living. Vector—A carrier organism (such as a fly or mosquito) which serves to deliver a virus (or other agent of infection) to a host.

Diagnosis Diagnosis of yellow fever depends on the examination of blood by various techniques in order to demonstrate either yellow fever viral antigens (the part of the virus that stimulates the patient’s immune system to respond) or specific antibodies (specific cells produced by the patient’s immune system which are directed against the yellow fever virus). The diagnosis can be strongly suspected when Faget’s sign is present. When the classic triad of symptoms is noted yellow fever is strongly suspected.

Treatment There are no current anti-viral treatments available to combat the yellow fever virus. The only treatment of yellow fever involves attempts to relieve its symptoms. Fevers and pain should be relieved with acetaminophen, not aspirin or ibuprofen, both of which could increase the already-present risk of bleeding. Dehydration (due to fluid loss both from fever and bleeding) needs to be carefully avoided. This can be accomplished by increasing fluids. The risk of bleeding into the stomach can be decreased through the administration of antacids and other medications. Hemorrhage may require blood transfusions. Kidney failure may require dialysis (a process that allows the work of the kidneys in clearing the blood of potentially toxic substances to be taken over by a machine, outside of the body).

Prognosis Five to ten percent of all diagnosed cases of yellow fever are fatal. Jaundice occurring during a yellow fever infection is an extremely grave predictor. Twenty to fifty percent of these patients die of the infection. Death may occur due to massive bleeding (hemorrhage), often following a lapse into a comatose state. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Prevention A very safe, very effective yellow fever vaccine exists. About 95% of vaccine recipients acquire longterm immunity to the yellow fever virus. Careful measures to decrease mosquito populations in both urban areas and jungle areas in which humans are working, along with programs to vaccinate all people living in such areas, are necessary to avoid massive yellow fever outbreaks. Resources BOOKS

Ray, C. George. “Arthropod-Borne and Other Zoonotic Viruses.” In Sherris Medical Microbiology: An Introduction to Infectious Diseases. 3rd ed. Ed. Kenneth J. Ryan. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. Shope, Robert E. “Yellow Fever.” In Cecil Textbook of Medicine, ed. J. Claude Bennett and Fred Plum. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1996. Stoffman, Phyllis. The Family Guide to Preventing and Treating 100 Infectious Diseases. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1995. PERIODICALS

Farley, Dixie. “Treating Tropical Diseases.” FDA Consumer (Jan./Feb. 1997): 26+. Robertson, Susan E., et al. “Yellow Fever: A Decade of Reemergence.” Journal of the American Medical Association (9 Oct. 1996): 1157+. ORGANIZATIONS

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton Rd., NE, Atlanta, GA 30333. (800) 311-3435, (404) 639-3311. .

Rosalyn Carson-DeWitt, MD 3591

Yellow fever

and the patient’s skin to take on a distinctive yellow color. This is due to liver damage, and the accumulation of a substance called bilirubin, which is normally processed by a healthy liver. The liver damage also results in a tendency toward bleeding; the patient’s vomit appears black due to the presence of blood. Protein, which is normally kept out of the urine by healthy, intact kidneys, appears in the urine due to disruption of the kidney’s healthy functioning.

Yersinosis

Yersinia enterocolitica infection see Yersinosis Yersinia pestis see Plague Yersinia pseudotuberculosis infection see Yersinosis

Yersinosis Definition Yersinosis refers to infection by a genus of bacteria known as Yersinia. The two sub-types that are responsible for yersinosis are Yersinia enterocolitica and Yersinia pseudotuberculosis. The diseases produced by these organisms are called “zoonoses,” because the bacteria is passed to humans from animal sources. The name Yersinia comes from Dr. Alexandre Yersin, who was the first person to grow a much more deadly type of Yersinia known as Yersinia pestis, the bacteria responsible for what is now known as bubonic plague. This article, however, will deal with the more common forms of Yersinia, namely Y. enterocolitica and Y. pseudotuberculosis.

Description Yersinia are classified as gram-negative bacteria (bacteria that do not accept the color of a stain in a Gram stain test, which indicates the general chemical nature of the cell wall of the bacteria); they have a variety of appearances, and are therefore called pleomorphic. They belong to Enterobacteriacae, the large group of organisms that inhabit the intestinal tract. There are many different subtypes of Yersinia. They are found worldwide and have been isolated from soil, fresh water, contaminated foods, and many wild and domestic animals. For reasons not entirely clear, disease caused by these organisms occurs more frequently in areas of northern Europe, especially Scandinavia. Infection, particularly in children ages one through four years, is quite common, though often these infections produce few symptoms. Studies have shown that infection with these bacteria is almost as common as that with Shigella or Campylobacter.

Causes and symptoms Animals are the most important sources of bacterial infection for humans. Whether from pets or undercooked 3592

meat (especially pork), these bacteria almost always enter the human body through the mouth (oral transmission). An incubation period of one to eleven days passes before signs of disease develop. Rare cases have been transmitted by way of contaminated blood transfusions. Yersinia produces several different types of disease. The most common form is a short-lived inflammation of the intestine known as enterocolitis. Most often the very end of the small intestine is involved, an area known as the terminal ileum. The result is gastroenteritis, with cramping abdominal pain, fever, and diarrhea. Diarrhea generally continues for two weeks or so, but can go on for many months. Up to 40% of patients also experience nausea and vomiting; and in one-third, inflammation of the intestine leads to bleeding. In other patients, the same area of the intestine is involved, but instead of causing diarrhea, a syndrome resembling appendicitis occurs. In this syndrome, the lymph nodes surrounding the intestine are especially involved; this has lead to the term mesenteric adenitis. Although this syndrome resolves without serious consequences, it is often difficult to differentiate from appendicitis, and leads to surgery in some instances. Ultrasound exam may be able to demonstrate a normal appendix and avoid surgery. Why some patients develop symptoms of gastroenteritis, and others only inflammation, pain, and fever, is unknown. In some patients, Yersinia produces infection of areas other than the intestinal tract. These include: • Inflammation of the throat (pharyngitis) and tonsillitis; this can be quite severe and even lead to death, particularly in adults. • Septicemia, or infection of the blood stream, with spreading of infection to other organs such as bone, meninges, kidneys, and others. Individuals with decreased immunity due to liver disease, diabetes, cancer, and other diseases are at increased risk for this complication. Different parts of the body may be affected (such as joints, eyes, and urinary system) by changes in the immune system caused by Yersinia infection. Arthritis, which is especially frequent in Scandinavia, occurs in up to 10% of Yersinia infections. About one week after typical intestinal symptoms, swelling and pain in multiple joints occurs. The knees and ankles are most often involved, and become inflamed over a period of two weeks. In two-thirds of those affected, symptoms gradually resolve over one to three months without need for treatment. Rarely does chronic joint disease develop. Inflammation of the heart muscle, called myocarditis, sometimes occurs together with the arthritis. In about GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Diagnosis Identifying Yersinia as the cause of all or any of these symptoms is not an easy task. It is possible to grow the organism from stool cultures, but this is difficult to do unless special methods are used. A change in antibody levels can also be used to determine the presence of infection. To be accurate, levels must be initially examined early in the illness. Therefore, it is most important for the possible diagnosis and examination to be thought of early.

Yoga

15-20% of patients, the skin develops a red, raised area, usually located on the shins, called erythema nodosum. This appears within a few weeks of the intestinal symptoms and disappears over a month or so.

KEY TERMS Mesenteric adenitis—Inflammation of the lymph nodes which serve the small intestine. Has symptoms similar to appendicitis. Septicemia—Systemic disease associated with the presence of microorganisms or their toxins in the blood; blood poisoning.

Undercooked food, especially pork or other animal products, should not be eaten. Resources

Treatment Since most of the symptoms caused by Yersinia are self limiting, specific antibiotic treatment is generally not needed. Patients with dehydration from gastroenteritis are given supportive therapy, including treatment aimed at replacing fluids. Antibiotics are indicated, however, for those patients who develop more severe infections, such as invasion of the bloodstream (septicemia), or who develop infections at specific sites, such as bone. A variety of antibiotics have been used, but it is not clear which produces the best results. No specific treatment is indicated for the joint, ocular, skin, or urinary symptoms that result from infection. As stated, these are not due to direct invasion by the bacteria, but are related to changes in immune reactions produced by the infection. However, treatment of those experiencing severe arthritic symptoms with NSAIDS (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) or steroid injection at inflamed joints is used in selected cases.

Prognosis As noted above, most of the time, Yersinia infection has an excellent outlook. However, when these bacteria invade the bloodstream or produce disease beyond the gastrointestinal tract, the outlook is less positive. This may be because more severe infections occur in those with decreased immunity. Death rate from septicemia has been reported to be as high as 50%.

Prevention Safe food handling procedures and food-preparation practices are by far the best means of avoiding infection. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

BOOKS

Campbell, Grant L., and David T. Dennis. “Other Yersinia Infections.” In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, ed. Anthony S. Fauci, et al. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997. Hamer, Davidson H., and Sherwood L. Gorbach. “Yersinia.” In Sleisenger & Fordtran’s Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease, ed. Mark Feldman, et al. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders Co., 1997. OTHER

“Bad Bug Book.” Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition. .

David Kaminstein, MD

Yoga Definition The term yoga comes from a Sanskrit word which means yoke or union. Traditionally, yoga is a method joining the individual self with the Divine, Universal Spirit, or Cosmic Consciousness. Physical and mental exercises are designed to help achieve this goal, also called self-transcendence or enlightenment. On the physical level, yoga postures, called asanas, are designed to tone, strengthen, and align the body. These postures are performed to make the spine supple and healthy and to promote blood flow to all the organs, glands, and tissues, keeping all the bodily systems healthy. On the mental level, yoga uses breathing techniques (pranayama) and meditation (dyana) to quiet, clarify, and discipline the mind. However, experts are quick to point out that yoga 3593

Yoga Yoga is a system that benefits the body, mind, and spirit by teaching self-control through a series of postures and exercises as well as through breathing, relaxation, and meditation techniques. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

is not a religion, but a way of living with health and peace of mind as its aims.

Purpose Yoga has been used to alleviate problems associated with high blood pressure, high cholesterol, migraine headaches, asthma, shallow breathing, backaches, constipation, diabetes, menopause, multiple sclerosis, varicose veins, carpal tunnel syndrome and many chronic illnesses. It also has been studied and approved for its ability to promote relaxation and reduce stress. Yoga can also provide the same benefits as any welldesigned exercise program, increasing general health and stamina, reducing stress, and improving those conditions brought about by sedentary lifestyles. Yoga has the added advantage of being a low-impact activity that uses only gravity as resistance, which makes it an excellent physical therapy routine; certain yoga postures can be safely used to strengthen and balance all parts of the body. Meditation has been much studied and approved for its benefits in reducing stress-related conditions. The landmark book,The Relaxation Response, by Harvard cardiologist Herbert Benson, showed that meditation and breathing techniques for relaxation could have the opposite effect of stress, reducing blood pressure and other indicators. Since then, much research has reiterated the benefits of meditation for stress reduction and general health. Currently, the American Medical Association recommends meditation techniques as a first step before medication for borderline hypertension cases. Modern psychological studies have shown that even slight facial expressions can cause changes in the involuntary nervous system; yoga utilizes the mind/body connection. That is, yoga practice contains the central ideas that 3594

physical posture and alignment can influence a person’s mood and self-esteem, and also that the mind can be used to shape and heal the body. Yoga practitioners claim that the strengthening of mind/body awareness can bring eventual improvements in all facets of a person’s life.

Description Origins Yoga originated in ancient India and is one of the longest surviving philosophical systems in the world. Some scholars have estimated that yoga is as old as 5,000 years; artifacts detailing yoga postures have been found in India from over 3000 B.C. Yoga masters (yogis) claim that it is a highly developed science of healthy living that has been tested and perfected for all these years. Yoga was first brought to America in the late 1800s when Swami Vivekananda, an Indian teacher and yogi, presented a lecture on meditation in Chicago. Yoga slowly began gaining followers, and flourished during the 1960s when there was a surge of interest in Eastern philosophy. There has since been a vast exchange of yoga knowledge in America, with many students going to India to study and many Indian experts coming here to teach, resulting in the establishment of a wide variety schools. Today, yoga is thriving, and it has become easy to find teachers and practitioners throughout America. A recent Roper poll, commissioned byYoga Journal, found that 11 million Americans do yoga at least occasionally and 6 million perform it regularly. Yoga stretches are used by physical therapists and professional sports teams, and the benefits of yoga are being touted by movie stars and Fortune 500 executives. Many prestigious schools of medicine have studied and introduced yoga techniques as proven therapies for illness and stress. Some medical schools, like UCLA, even offer yoga classes as part of their physician training program. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

There are several different schools of hatha yoga in America; the two most prevalent ones are Iyengar and ashtanga yoga. Iyengar yoga was founded by B.K.S. Iyengar, who is widely considered as one of the great living innovators of yoga. Iyengar yoga puts strict emphasis on form and alignment, and uses traditional hatha yoga techniques in new manners and sequences. Iyengar yoga can be good for physical therapy because it allows the use of props like straps and blocks to make it easier for some people to get into the yoga postures. Ashtanga yoga can be a more vigorous routine, using a flowing and dance-like sequence of hatha postures to generate body heat, which purifies the body through sweating and deep breathing. The other types of yoga show some of the remaining ideas which permeate yoga. Raja yoga strives to bring about mental clarity and discipline through meditation, simplicity, and non-attachment to worldly things and desires. Karma yoga emphasizes charity, service to others, non-aggression and non-harming as means to awareness and peace. Bhakti yoga is the path of devotion and love of God, or Universal Spirit. Jnana yoga is the practice and development of knowledge and wisdom. Finally, tantra yoga is the path of self-awareness through religious rituals, including awareness of sexuality as sacred and vital. A typical hatha yoga routine consists of a sequence of physical poses, or asanas, and the sequence is designed to work all parts of the body, with particular emphasis on making the spine supple and healthy and increasing circulation. Hatha yoga asanas utilize three basic movements: forward bends, backward bends, and twisting motions. Each asana is named for a common thing it resembles, like the sun salutation, cobra, locust, plough, bow, eagle, tree, and the head to knee pose, to GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Yoga

Classical yoga is separated into eight limbs, each a part of the complete system for mental, physical and spiritual well-being. Four of the limbs deal with mental and physical exercises designed to bring the mind in tune with the body. The other four deal with different stages of meditation. There are six major types of yoga, all with the same goals of health and harmony but with varying techniques: hatha, raja, karma, bhakti, jnana, and tantra yoga. Hatha yoga is the most commonly practiced branch of yoga in America, and it is a highly developed system of nearly 200 physical postures, movements and breathing techniques designed to tune the body to its optimal health. The yoga philosophy believes the breath to be the most important facet of health, as the breath is the largest source of prana, or life force, and hatha yoga utilizespranayama, which literally means the science or control of breathing. Hatha yoga was originally developed as a system to make the body strong and healthy enough to enable mental awareness and spiritual enlightenment.

PATA N JA L I There is little historical information available on Patanjali, who is credited with developing yoga, one of the six systems of Hindu philosophy. Several scholars suggest several persons may have developed yoga under the pseudonym of Patanjali. In any case, Patanjali existed around 150 B.C. in India. He developed yoga based on a loose set of doctrines and practices from the Upanishads, themselves a set of mystical writings. The Upanishads are part of the Aranyakas, philosophical concepts that are part of the Veda, the most ancient body of literature of Hinduism. Patanjali gave these combined philosophical and esoteric writings a common foundation in his Yoga Sutra, a set of 196 concise aphorisms (wise sayings) that form the principles of yoga. He also drew upon Samkhya, the oldest classic system of Hindu philosophy. Patanjali’s yoga accepted Samkhya metaphysics and the concept of a supreme soul. He established an eight-stage discipline of self-control and meditation. The individual sutras (verses) lay out the entire tradition of meditation. They also describe the moral and physical disciplines needed for the soul to attain absolute freedom from the body and self.

name a few. Each pose has steps for entering and exiting it, and each posture requires proper form and alignment. A pose is held for some time, depending on its level of difficulty and one’s strength and stamina, and the practitioner is also usually aware of when to inhale and exhale at certain points in each posture, as breathing properly is another fundamental aspect of yoga. Breathing should be deep and through the nose. Mental concentration in each position is also very important, which improves awareness, poise and posture. During a yoga routine there is often a position in which to perform meditation, if deep relaxation is one of the goals of the sequence. Yoga routines can take anywhere from 20 minutes to two or more hours, with one hour being a good time investment to perform a sequence of postures and a meditation. Some yoga routines, depending on the teacher and school, can be as strenuous as the most difficult workout, and some routines merely stretch and align the body while the breath and heart rate are kept slow and steady. Yoga achieves its best results when it is practiced as a daily discipline, and yoga can be a life-long exercise routine, offering deeper and more challenging positions as a practitioner becomes more adept. The basic positions can increase a person’s strength, flexibility and sense of well-being almost immediately, but it can take years to perfect and deepen them, which is an appealing and stimulating aspect of yoga for many. 3595

Yoga

Cobra

Tree

Lotus (half)

Triangle

Demonstrations of the tree, triangle, cobra, and lotus poses. The tree and triangle are good for balance and coordination. Cobra stretches the pelvic and strengthens the back. Lotus is a meditative pose. (Illustration by Electronic Illustrators Group.)

3596

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Preparations Yoga can be performed by those of any age and condition, although not all poses should be attempted by everyone. Yoga is also a very accessible form of exercise; all that is needed is a flat floor surface large enough to stretch out on, a mat or towel, and enough overhead space to fully raise the arms. It is a good activity for those who can’t go to gyms, who don’t like other forms of exercise, or have very busy schedules. Yoga should be done on an empty stomach, and teachers recommend waiting three or more hours after meals. Loose and comfortable clothing should be worn.

Precautions People with injuries, medical conditions, or spinal problems should consult a doctor before beginning yoga. Those with medical conditions should find a yoga teacher who is familiar with their type of problem and who is willing to give them individual attention. Pregnant women can benefit from yoga, but should always be guided by an experienced teacher. Certain yoga positions should not be performed with a fever, or during menstruation. Beginners should exercise care and concentration when performing yoga postures, and not try to stretch too much too quickly, as injury could result. Some advanced yoga postures, like the headstand and full lotus position, can be difficult and require strength, flexibility, and gradual preparation, so beginners should get the help of a teacher before attempting them. Yoga is not a competive sport; it does not matter how a person does in comparison with others, but how aware and disciplined one becomes with one’s own body and limitations. Proper form and alignment should always be maintained during a stretch or posture, and the stretch or posture should be stopped when there is pain, dizziness, or fatigue. The mental component of yoga is just as important as the physical postures. Concentration and awareness of breath should not be neglected. Yoga should be done with an open, gentle, and non-critical mind; when one stretches into a yoga position, it can be thought of accepting and working on one’s limits. ImpaGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Yoga

Yoga is usually best learned from a yoga teacher or physical therapist, but yoga is simple enough that one can learn the basics from good books on the subject, which are plentiful. Yoga classes are generally inexpensive, averaging around 10 dollars per class, and students can learn basic postures in just a few classes. Many YMCAs, colleges, and community health organizations offer beginning yoga classes as well, often for nominal fees. If yoga is part of a physical therapy program, it can be reimbursed by insurance.

KEY TERMS Asana—A position or stance in yoga. Dyana—The yoga term for meditation. Hatha yoga—Form of yoga using postures, breathing methods and meditation. Meditation—Technique of concentration for relaxing the mind and body. Pranayama—Yoga breathing techniques. Yogi—A trained yoga expert.

tience, self-criticism and comparing oneself to others will not help in this process of self-knowledge. While performing the yoga of breathing (pranayama) and meditation (dyana), it is best to have an experienced teacher, as these powerful techniques can cause dizziness and discomfort when done improperly.

Side effects Some people have reported injuries by performing yoga postures without proper form or concentration, or by attempting difficult positions without working up to them gradually or having appropriate supervision. Beginners sometimes report muscle soreness and fatigue after performing yoga, but these side effects diminish with practice.

Research and general acceptance Although yoga originated in a culture very different from modern America, it has been accepted and its practice has spread relatively quickly. Many yogis are amazed at how rapidly yoga’s popularity has spread in America, considering the legend that it was passed down secretly by handfuls of adherents for many centuries. There can still be found some resistance to yoga, for active and busy Americans sometimes find it hard to believe that an exercise program that requires them to slow down, concentrate, and breathe deeply can be more effective than lifting weights or running. However, ongoing research in top medical schools is showing yoga’s effectiveness for overall health and for specific problems, making it an increasingly acceptable health practice. Resources BOOKS

Ansari, Mark, and Lark, Liz. Yoga for Beginners. New York: Harper, 1999. 3597

Yoga

Bodian, Stephan, and Feuerstein, Georg. Living Yoga. New York: Putnam, 1993. Carrico, Mara. Yoga Journal’s Yoga Basics. New York: Henry Holt, 1997. Iyengar, B.K.S. Light on Yoga. New York: Schocken, 1975. PERIODICALS

Yoga Journal. P.O. Box 469088, Escondido, CA 92046. . Yoga International Magazine. R.R. 1 Box 407, Honesdale, PA 18431. .

3598

ORGANIZATIONS

International Association of Yoga Therapists (IAYT), 4150 Tivoli Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90066. OTHER

. .

Douglas Dupler

“Yuppie flu” see Chronic fatigue syndrome

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Z Zenker’s diverticulum see Esophageal pouches Zidovudine see Antiretroviral drugs Zinc deficiency see Mineral deficiency Zinc excess see Mineral toxicity Zolpidem see Anti-insomnia drugs

Some zoonotic diseases are well known, such as rats (plague), deer tick (Lyme disease). Others are not as well known. For example, elephants may develop tuberculosis, and spread it to humans.

Causes and symptoms The following is a partial list of animals and the diseases that they may carry. Not all animal carriers are listed, nor are all the diseases that the various species may carry. • Bats are important rabies carriers, and also carry several other viral diseases that can affect humans.

Zoonosis Definition Zoonosis, also called zoonotic disease refers to diseases that can be passed from animals, whether wild or domesticated, to humans.

Description Although many diseases are species specific, meaning that they can only occur in one animal species, many other diseases can be spread between different animal species. These are infectious diseases, caused by bacteria, viruses, or other disease causing organisms that can live as well in humans as in other animals. There are different methods of transmission for different diseases. In some cases, zoonotic diseases are transferred by direct contact with infected animals, much as being near an infected human can cause the spread of an infectious disease. Other diseases are spread by drinking water that contains the eggs of parasites. The eggs enter the water supply from the feces of infected animals. Still others are spread by eating the flesh of infected animals. Tapeworms are spread this way. Other diseases are spread by insect vectors. An insect, such as a flea or tick, feeds on an infected animal, then feeds on a human. In the process, the insect transfer the infecting organism. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

• Cats may carry the causative organisms for plague, anthrax, cowpox, tapeworm, and many bacterial infections. • Dogs may carry plague, tapeworm, rabies, Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, and Lyme disease. • Horses may carry anthrax, rabies, and Salmonella infections. • Cattle may carry the organisms that cause anthrax, European tick-borne encephalitis, rabies, tapeworm, Salmonella infections and many bacterial and viral diseases. • Pigs are best known for carrying tapeworm, but may also carry a large number of other infections including anthrax, influenza, and rabies. • Sheep and goats may carry rabies, European tick-borne encephalitis, Salmonella infections, and many bacterial and viral diseases. • Rabbits may carry plague and Q-Fever. • Birds may carry Campylobacteriosis , Chlamydia psittaci, Pasteurella multocida, Histoplasma capsulatum, Salmonellosis, and others. Zoonotic diseases may be spread in different ways. Tapeworms care often spread to humans when they eat the infected meat of fish, cattle, and swine. Other diseases are transferred by insect vectors, often blood-feeding insects that carry the cause of the disease from one animal to another. 3599

Zoonosis

Prevention

KEY TERMS Anthrax—A diease of wam blooded animals, particularly cattle and sheep, transmissable to humans. The disease causes severe skin and lung damage. Bovine spongiform encephalopathy—A progressive, fatal disease of the nervous system of domestic animals. It is transmitted by eating infected food. Lyme disease—An acute disease which is usually marked by skin rash, fever, fatigue and chills. Left untreated, it may cause heart and nervous system damage. Q-Fever—A disease that is marked by high fever, chills and muscle pain. It is seen in North America, Europe, and parts of Africa. It may be spread by drinking raw milk, or by tick bites. Zoonotic—A disease which can be sreap from animals to humans.

Diagnosis Diagnosis of the disease is made in the usual manner, by identifying the infecting organism. Each disease has established symptoms and tests. Identifying the carrier may be easy, or may be more difficult when the cause is a fairly common infection. For example, tapeworms are usually species specific. Cattle, pigs, and fish all carry different species of tapeworms, although all can be transmitted to humans who eat undercooked meat containing live tapeworm eggs. Once the tapeworm has been identified, it is easy to tell which species the tapeworm came from. Other zoonotic infections may be harder to identify. Sometimes the infection is fairly common among both humans and animals, and it is impossible to tell. Snakes may carry the bacteria Escherichia coli and Proteus vulgaris, but since these bacteria are already common among humans, it would be difficult to trace infections back to snakes. Because of increased trade between nations, and changes in animal habitats, there are often new zoonotic diseases. These may be found in animals transported from one nation to another, bringing with them new diseases. In some cases, changes in the environment lead to changes in the migratory habits of animal species, bringing new infections.

Treatment Treatment is the established treatment for the specific infection. 3600

Prevention of zoonotic infections may take different forms, depending on the nature of the carrier and the infection. Some zoonotic infections can be avoided by immunizing the animals that carry the disease. Pets and other domestic animals should have rabies vaccinations, and wild animals are immunized with an oral vaccine that is encased in a suitable bait. In some places, the bait is dropped by airplane over the range of the potential rabies carrier. When the animal eats the bait, they also ingest the oral vaccine, thereby protecting them from rabies, and reducing the risk of spread of the disease. This method has been used to protect foxes, coyotes, and other wild animals. Many zoonotic diseases that are passed by eating the meat of infected animals can be prevented by proper cooking of the infected meat. Tapeworm infestations can be prevented by cooking, and Salmonella infections from chickens and eggs can be prevented by being sure that both the meat and the eggs are fully cooked. For other zoonotic diseases, programs are in place to eliminate the host, or the vector that spreads the disease. Plague is prevented by elimination of the rats—a common source of the infection—and of fleas that carry the disease from rats to humans. Efforts to control bovine spongiform encephalitis, better known as Mad Cow disease, have focused on the destruction of infected cattle to prevent spread of the disease. Other means of prevention simply rely on care. People living in areas where Lyme disease is common are warned to take precautions against the bite of the deer tick, which transfers the disease. These precautions include not walking in tall grass, not walking bare legged, and wearing light-colored clothing so that the presence of the dark ticks can be readily seen. Resources PERIODICALS

“CDC improves monitoring of outbreaks.” American Medical News (January 24, 2000). “When man’s best friend isn’t.” Mother Earth News (June/July 2000). “The zoonotic threat: Curbing pet-to-people infections.” Dog World (October 1999). “Zoonoses.” Agricultural Research (February 2000). ORGANIZATIONS

American Association of Zoo Keepers (AAZK). Topeka Zoological Park 3601 SW 29th St., Ste. 133 Topeka, KS 66614-2054. National Animal Disease Center Zoonotic Research Unit. 2300 Dayton Ave. PO Box 70 Ames, IA 50010.

Samuel Uretsky, PharmD GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

ORGANIZATIONS The following is an alphabetical compilation of organizations listed in the Resources section of the main body entries. Although the list is comprehensive, it is by no means exhaustive. It is a starting point for further information, as well as other online and print sources. Many of the organizations listed provide information for multiple disorders and have links to additional related websites. E-mail addresses and web addresses listed were provided by the associations; Gale Group is not responsible for the accuracy of the addresses or the contents of the websites.

A Academy of General Dentistry Ste. 1200, 211 East Chicago Ave. Chicago, IL 60611 (312) 440-4300 Academy for Guided Imagery PO Box 2070 Mill Valley, CA 94942 (800) 726-2070 Achromatopsia Network C/O Frances Futterman PO Box 214 Berkeley, CA 94701-0214 Acid Maltase Deficiency Association PO Box 700248 San Antonio, TX 78270-0248 (210) 494-6144 Acoustic Neuroma Association of Canada Box 369 Edmonton, AB T5J 2J6 (800) 561-ANAC(2622) (780) 428-3384 anac@compusmartab.ca Action Against Allergy (AAA) PO Box 278 Twickenham Middlesex, Greater London TW1 4QQ United Kingdom Acupressure Institute 1533 Shattuck Ave Berkeley, CA 94709 Advancement of Women’s Health Research 1828 L St NW, Ste. 625 Washington, DC 20036 (202) 223-8224

Aerospace Medical Association 320 S Henry St Alexandria, VA 22314-3579 (703) 739-2240 Agoraphobics Building Independent Lives 3805 Cutshaw Ave, Ste. 415, Dept W Richmond, VA 23230 (804) 353-3964 Agoraphobic Foundation of Canada PO Box 132 Chomedey, Laval, Quebec H7W 4K2 Canada Agoraphobics In Motion 605 W 11 Mile Rd Royal Oak, MI 48067 (248) 547-0400 Al-Anon, Al-anon Family Group, Inc PO Box 862, Midtown Station New York, NY 10018-0862 (800)356-9996 Albert Ellis Institute 45 East 65th St New York, NY 10021 (800) 323-4738 Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) General Service Office 475 Riverside Dr New York, NY 10015 (212) 870-3400 Alexander Graham Bell Association for the Deaf 3417 Volta Place NW Washington, DC 20007 (202) 337-5220 Alexander Technique International 1692 Massachusetts Ave, 3rd Floor Cambridge, MA 02138

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

(888) 321-0856 Fax: (617) 497-2615 ati@ati-netcom Alliance of Genetic Support Groups 4301 Connecticut Ave NW, Ste. 404 Washington, DC 20008 (202)966-5557 Alliance for Lung Cancer Advocacy, Support and Education PO Box 849 Vancouver, WA 98666 (800) 298-2436 Alzheimer’s Association 919 North Michigan Ave, Ste. 1000 Chicago, IL 60611 (800) 272-3900 Ambiguous Genitalia Support Network PO Box 313 Clements, CA 95227 (209) 727-0313 American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology 611 East Wells St Milwaukee, WI 53202 (800) 822-2762 American Academy of Audiology 8201 Greensboro Dr, Ste. 300 McLean, VA 22102 (703) 610-9022 American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP) 3615 Wisconsin Ave NW Washington, DC 20016 (202) 966-7300 3603

Organizations

American Academy of Clinical Sexologists 1929 18th St NW, Ste. 1166 Washington, DC 20009 (202) 462-2122

American Academy of Ophthalmology 655 Beach St PO Box 7424 San Francisco, CA 94120-7424

American Association of Acupuncture & Oriental Medicine 4101 Lake Boone Trail, Ste. 201 Raleigh, NC 27607 (919) 787-5181

American Academy of Cosmetic Surgery 401 N Michigan Ave Chicago, IL 60611-4267 (313) 527-6713

American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons 6300 N River Road Rosemont, IL 60018 (847) 823-7186

American Academy of Dermatology 930 N Meacham Road PO Box 4014 Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014 (847) 330-0230

American Academy of OtolaryngologyHead and Neck Surgery, Inc One Prince St Alexandria, VA 22314-3357 (703) 836-4444

American Academy of Emergency Medicine 611 East Wells St Milwaukee, WI 53202 (800) 884-2236 Fax: (414) 276-3349

American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry 211 East Chicago Ave, Ste. 700 Chicago, IL 60611-2616 (312) 337-2169

American Academy of Environmental Medicine PO Box CN 1001-8001 New Hope, PA 18938 (215) 862-4544 American Academy of Facial, Plastic, and Reconstructive Surgery 1110 Vermont Ave NW, Ste. 220 Washington, DC 20005 (800) 332-3223 American Academy of Family Physicians 11400 Tomahawk Creek Parkway Leawood, KS 66211-2672 (913) 906-6000 American Academy of HusbandCoached Childbirth PO Box 5224 Sherman Oaks, CA 91413 (800) 423-2397 (800) 422-4784 (in California) American Academy of Medical Acupuncture 2520 Milvia St Berkeley, CA 94704 (415) 841-3220 American Academy of Neurology 1080 Montreal Ave St Paul, MN 55116 (612) 695-1940 3604

American Academy of Pediatrics 141 Northwest Point Blvd Elk Grove Village, IL 60007-1098 (847) 434-4000 Fax: (847) 434-8000 American Academy of Wound Management 1255 23rd St NW Washington, DC 20037 (202) 521-0368 American Allergy Association (AAA) 3104 E Camelback, Ste. 459 Phoenix, AZ 85016 American Amputation Foundation Inc PO Box 250218 Hillcrest Station Little Rock, AR 72225 (501) 666-2523 American Anorexia/Bulimia Association Inc 293 Central Park West, Ste. IR New York, NY 10024 (212) 501-8351 American Art Therapy Association 1202 Allanson Rd Mundelein, IL 60060-3808 (888) 290-0878 (847) 949-6064 Fax: (847)566-4580 arttherapy@ntrnet

American Association of Blood Banks 8101 Glenbrook Road Bethesda, MD 20814 (301) 907-6977 American Association of Colleges of Osteopathic Medicine 5550 Friendship Blvd, Ste. 310 Chevy Chase, MD 20815-7231 (301) 968-4100 American Association for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome 7 Van Buren St Albany, NY 12206 (518) 435-1765 American Association of the DeafBlind 814 Thayer Ave, Ste. 302 Silver Spring, MD 20910 (301) 588-6545 American Association of Endodontists 211 East Chicago Ave, Ste. 1100 Chicago, IL 60611-2691 (800) 872-3636 American Association of Kidney Patients (AAKP) 100 S Ashley Dr, Ste. 280 Tampa, FL 33602 (800) 749-2257 American Association of Nutritional Consultants 810 S Buffalo St Warsaw, IN 46580 (888) 828-2262 American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy 1133 15th St NW, Ste. 300 Washington, DC 20005-2710 (202) 452-0109 American Association on Mental Retardation (AAMR) 444 North Capitol St NW, Ste. 846 Washington, DC 20001-1512 (800) 424-3688

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

American Association of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgeons 9700 W Bryn Mawr Ave Rosemont, IL 60018 (847) 678-6200

American Cancer Society (National Headquarters) 1599 Clifton Road NE Atlanta, GA 30329 (800) 227-2345 American Celiac Society 58 Musano Court West Orange, NJ 07052 (201) 325-8837

American Association of Oriental Medicine 433 Front St Catasququa, PA 18032 (888) 500-7999

American Chiropractic Association 1701 Clarendon Blvd Arlington, VA 22209 (800)986-4636

American Association of Orthodontists 401 North Lindbergh Blvd St Louis, MO 63141-7816 (314) 993-1700

American Chronic Pain Association PO Box 850 Rocklin, CA 95677-0850 (916) 632-0922

American Association for Respiratory Care 11030 Ables Lane Dallas, TX 75229 (972) 243-2272

American College of Allergy Asthma & Immunology 85 West Algonquin Road, Ste. 550 Arlington Heights, IL 60005 (847) 427-1200

American Association of Sex Educators Counselors and Therapists PO Box 5488 Richmond, VA 23220 American Association of Tissue Banks 1350 Beverly Road, Ste. 220-A McLean, VA 22101 (703) 827-9582 American Behcet’s Disease Association PO Box 280240 Memphis, TN 38168-0240 American Board of Hypnotherapy 16842 Von Karman Ave, Ste. 476 Irvine, CA 92714 American Botanical Council PO Box 201660 Austin, TX 78720-1660 American Brain Tumor Association 2720 River Road, Ste. 146 Des Plaines, IL 60018-4110 (800) 886-2282 American Burn Association 625 N Michigan Ave, Ste. 1530 Chicago, IL 60611 (800) 548-2876

American College of Angiology 295 Northern Blvd, Ste. 104 Great Neck, NY 11021-4701 American College of Emergency Physicians PO Box 619911 Dallas, TX 75261-9911 (800) 798-1822 (972) 550-0911 Fax: (972) 580-2816 info@acep.org American College of Gastroenterology 4900 B South 31st St Arlington, VA 22206 (703) 820-7400 American College of Hyperbaric Medicine PO Box 25914-130 Houston, TX 77265 (713) 528-0657 American College of Nuclear Medicine PO Box 175 Landisville, PA 31906 (717) 898-6006 American College of Nutrition 722 Robert E Lee Dr Wilmington, NC 20412-0927 (919) 152-1222

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 409 12th St SW PO Box 96920 Washington, DC 20090-6920 American College of Osteopathic Emergency Physicians 142 E Ontario St, Ste. 550 Chicago, IL 60611 (312) 587-3709 (800) 521-3709 Fax: (312) 587-9951 American College of Radiology 1891 Preston White Dr Reston, VA 22091 (800) 227-5463 American College of Rheumatology 1800 Century Place, Ste. 250 Atlanta, GA 30345 (404) 633-3777 American College of Sports Medicine 401 W Michigan St Indianapolis, IN 46202-3233 (317) 637-9200 Fax: (317) 634-7817 mkeckhaver@acsmorg American College of Surgeons 633 North St Clair St Chicago, IL 60611-32311 (312) 202-5000 Fax: (312) 202-5001 postmaster@facsorg American Council for Headache Education (ACHE) 19 Mantua Road Mt Royal, NJ 08061 (800) 255-2243 American Council on Transplantation PO Box 1709 Alexandria, VA 22313 (800) ACT-GIVE American Dental Association 211 E Chicago Ave Chicago, IL 60611 (312) 440-2500 American Dental Hygienists’ Association 444 North Michigan Ave Chicago, IL 60611 (800) 847-6718 3605

Organizations

American Association of Naturopathic Physicians 601, Valley St, Ste. 105 Seattle, WA 98109 (206) 298-0126

Organizations

American Diabetes Association 1701 North Beauregard St Alexandria, VA 22311 (800) 342-2383 American Dietetic Association 216 W Jackson Blvd Chicago, IL 60606-6995 (800) 745-0775 American Epilepsy Society 342 North Main St West Hartford, CT 06117-2507 (860) 586-7505 American Foundation for the Blind 11 Penn Plaza, Ste. 300 New York, NY 10001 (800) 232-5463 American Foundation for Homeopathy 1508 S Garfield Alhambra, CA 91801 American Foundation for the Prevention of Venereal Disease Inc 799 Broadway, Ste. 638 New York, NY 10003 (212) 759-2069 American Foundation for Urologic Disease 1128 N Charles St Baltimore, MD 21201 (401) 468-1800 American Gastroenterological Association (AGA) 7910 Woodmont Ave 7th Floor Bethesda, MD 20814 (310) 654-2055 aga001@aol.com American Hair Loss Council 30 Grassy Plain Road Bethel, CT 06801 (888) 873-9719 American Hearing Research Foundation 55 E Washington St, Ste. 2022 Chicago, IL 60602 (312) 726-9670 American Heart Association 7272 Greenville Ave Dallas, TX 75231-4596 (214) 373-6300 (800) 242-8721 inquire@heartorg 3606

American Hemochromatosis Society Inc 777 E Atlantic Ave PMB Z-363 Delray Beach, FL 33483-5352 (561) 266-9037 (888) 655-4766 ahs@eminet American Holistic Medical Association 4101 Lake Boone Trail, Ste. 201 Raleigh, NC 27607

American Medical Association 515 N State St Chicago, IL 60610 (312) 464-5000

American Institute for Cancer Research (AICR) 1759 R St NW Washington, DC 20009 (800) 843-8114

American Optometric Association 243 North Lindbergh Blvd St Louis, MO 63141 (314) 991-4100

American Institute of Nutrition 9650 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20814-3990 (301) 530-7050

American Oriental Bodywork Therapy Association 50 Maple Place Manhassett, NY 11030

American Institute of Stress 124 Park Ave Yonkers, NY 10703 (914) 963-1200 American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine 14750 Sweitzer Lane, Ste. 100 Laurel, MD 20707-5906 (800) 638-5352 American Institute of Vedic Studies PO Box 8357 Santa Fe NM 87504 (505) 983-9385

American Kidney Fund (AKF) Ste. 1010 6110 Executive Blvd Rockville, MD 20852 (800) 638-8299 American Leprosy Missions 1 ALM Way Greenville SC 29601 (800)LEPROSY American Liver Foundation 1425 Pompton Ave

American Lung Association 1740 Broadway New York, NY 10019 (800) 586-4872 (212) 315-8700 American Lyme Disease Foundation Inc Mill Pond Offices 293 Route 100, Ste. 204 Somers, NY 10589 (800) 876-LYME

American Humane Association Children’s Division 63 Inverness Dr East Englewood, CO 80112-5117 (800) 227-4645

American Kidney Foundation 6110 Executive Blvd #1010 Rockville, MD 20852 (800) 638-8299

Cedar Grove, NJ 07009 (800) 223-0179

American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society 222 South Prospect Park Ridge, IL 60068 American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine 6300 N River Road, Ste. 200 Rosemont, IL 60018 (847) 292-4900 American Pain Society 4700 W Lake Ave Glenview, IL 60025 (847) 375-4715 American Parkinson Disease Association 60 Bay St, Ste. 401 Staten Island, NY 10301 (800) 223-2732 American Podiatric Medical Association 9312 Old Georgetown Road Bethesda, MD 20814-1698 (301) 571-9200

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

American Polarity Therapy Association PO Box 19858 Boulder, CO 80308 (303) 545-2080 Fax: (303) 545-2161 American Physical Therapy Association 1111 North Fairfax St Alexandria, VA 22314 (800) 999-2782 American Porphyria Foundation PO Box 22712 Houston, TX 77227 (713) 266-9617 American Pseudo-Obstruction & Hirschsprung’s Society 158 Pleasant St North Andover, MA 01845 (978)685-4477 American Psychiatric Association 1400 K St NW Washington, DC 20005 (888) 357-7924 American Psychological Association (APA) 750 First St NE Washington, DC 20002-4242 (202) 336-5700 American Psychotherapy & Medical Hypnosis Association 210 S Sierra Reno, NV 89501 American Red Cross PO Box 37243 Washington, DC 20013 American Skin Association Inc 150 E 58th St, 3rd floor New York, NY 10155-0002 (212) 688-6547 American Sleep Apnea Association 1424 K St NW, Ste. 302 Washington, DC 20005 (202) 293-3650 American Sleep Disorders Association 1610 14th St NW, Ste. 300 Rochester, MN 55901 (507) 287-6006

American Social Health Association PO Box 13827 Research Triangle Park, NC 27709 (800) 227-8922

American Society for Gastrointestinal Endoscopy 13 Elm St Manchester, MA 01944 (508) 526-8330

American Society of Addiction Medicine 4601 North Park Ave Arcade, Ste. 101 Chevy Chase, MD 20815 (301) 656-3920

American Society of Hematology 1200 19th St NW, Ste. 300 Washington, DC 20036-2422 (202) 857-1118

American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery 4000 Legato Road, Ste. 850 Fairfax, VA 22033-4055 (703) 591-2220 American Society of Clinical Hypnosis 200 E Devon Ave Des Plaines, IL 60018 American Society of Clinical Oncology 225 Reinekers Lane, Ste. 650 Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 299-0150 American Society of Clinical Pathologists 2100 West Harrison St Chicago, IL 60612 (312) 738-1336 American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons 85 W Algonquin Road, Ste. 550 Arlington Heights, IL 60005 (847)290-9184 American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology 20 W Washington St, Ste. #1 Hagerstown, MD 21740 (800) 787-7227 American Society for Dermatologic Surgery 930 N Meacham Road PO Box 4014 Schaumburg, IL 60168-4014 (847) 330-9830 American Society of Extra-Corporeal Technology 11480 Sunset Hills Rd, Ste. 210E Reston, VA 20190 (703) 435-8556

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

American Society of Human Genetics 9650 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20814-3998 (301) 571-1825 American Society of Hypertension 515 Madison Ave, Ste. 1212 New York, NY 10022 (212) 644-0650 American Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery 2404, Ste.wart Square Wausau, WI 54401 (715) 845-9283 American Society of Microbiology 1752 N St NW Washington, DC 20036 (202) 737-3600 American Society of Nuclear Cardiology 9111 Old Georgetown Road Bethesda, MD 20814-1699 (301) 493-2360 Fax: (301) 493-2376 admin@asnc.org American Society of Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery 1133 West Morse Blvd #201 Winter Park, FL 32789 (407) 647-8839 American Society of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgeons 44 E Algonquin Rd Arlington Heights, IL 60005 (847) 228-9900 American Society for Prophylaxis in Obstetrics/LAMAZE (ASPO /LAMAZE) 1840 Wilson Blvd, Ste. 204 Arlington, VA 22201 (800) 368-4404 3607

Organizations

American Podiatry Association 20 Chevy Chase Circle NW Washington, DC 20015

Organizations

American Society of Radiologic Technologists 15000 Central Ave SE Albuquerque NM 87123-3917 (505) 298-4500 American Society for Reproductive Medicine 1209 Montgomery Highway Birmingham, AL 35216-2809 (205) 978-5000 American Society for Surgery of the Hand 6300 N River Rd, Ste. 600 Rosemont, IL 60018 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association 10801 Rockville Pike Rockville, MD 20852 (800) 638-8255 American Thoracic Society 1740 Broadway New York, NY 10019 (212) 315-8700 American Thyroid Association Inc Montefiore Medical Center 111 E 210th St Bronx, NY 10467 American Tinnitus Association PO Box 5 Portland, OR 97207 (503) 248-9985 tinnitus@ata.org American Trauma Society 8903 Presidential Pkwy, Ste. 512 Upper Marlboro, MD 20227 (800) 556-7890 American Urological Association 1120 North Charles St Baltimore, MD 21201-5559 (410) 727-1100

Anorexia Nervosa and Related Eating Disorders Inc PO Box 5102 Eugene, OR 97405 (541) 344-1144

Association for the Care of Children’s Health (ACCH) 7910 Woodmont Ave, Ste. 300 Bethesda, MD 20814 (800) 808-2224

Anxiety Disorders Association of America 11900 Park Lawn Dr, Ste. 100 Rockville, MD 20852 (800) 545-7367

Association for the Cure of Cancer of the Prostate (CaPCure) 1250 Fourth St, Ste. 360 Santa Monica, CA 90401 (800) 757-CURE

Aplastic Anemia Foundation of America PO Box 613 Annapolis, MD 21404 (800)747-2820

Association for Glycogen Storage Disease PO Box 896 Durant, IA 52747-9769 (319) 785-6038

The Arc 900 Varnum St NE Washington, DC 20017 (202) 636-2950 Arc of the United States (formerly Association for Retarded Citizens of the US) 500 East Border St, Ste. 300 Arlington, TX 76010 (817) 261-6003 Arteriovenous Malformation Support Group 168 Six Mile Canyon Road Dayton, NV 89403 (702) 246-0682 Arthritis Foundation 1300 W Peachtree St Atlanta, GA 30309 (800) 283-7800 Association for the Advancement of Gestalt Therapy 400 East 58th St New York, NY 10022 (212) 486-1581

Amputee Coalition of America PO Box 2528 Knoxville, TN 37901-2528 (888) 267-5669

Association for Applied Psychotherapy and Biofeedback 10200 W 44th Ave, Ste. 304 Wheat Ridge, CO 80033-2840 (303) 422-8436

Amyloidosis Network International 7118 Cole Creek Dr Houston, TX 77092-1421 (888) 1AMYLOID

Association of Birth Defect Children 3526 Emerywood Lane Orlando, FL 32806 (305) 859-2821

3608

Association for the Bladder Exstrophy Community PO Box 1472 Wake Forest, NC 27588-1472 (919) 624-9447

Association for Neuro-Metabolic Disorders 5223 Brookfield Lane Sylvania, OH 43560-1809 (419) 885-1497 Association of SIDS and Infant Mortality Programs Minnesota SID Center Children’s Hospitals and Clinics 2525 Chicago Ave S Minneapolis, MN 55404 (612) 813-6285 Association for Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus 42 Park Rd Peterborough PE1 2UQ United Kingdom 0173 355 5988 Fax: 017 3355 5985 postmaster@asbahorg Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America 1233 20th St NW, Ste. 402 Washington, DC 20036 (800) 727-8462 Aston Training Center P O Box 3568 Incline Village, NV 89450 (775) 831-8228 Astonpat@aolcom Audiology Awareness Campaign 3008 Millwood Ave

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Auditory-Verbal International 2121 Eisenhower Ave, Ste. 402 Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 739-1049 Autism Research Institute 4182 Adams Ave San Diego, CA 92116 (619) 281-7165 Autism Society of America 7910 Woodmont Ave, Ste. 300 Bethesda, MD 20814-3067 (800) 328-8476 Autism Network International PO Box 448 Syracuse, NY 13210 Ayurveda Holistic Center Bayville Long Island, NY (516)759-7731 mail@Ayurvedahccom Ayurvedic Institute 11311 Menaul NE Albuquerque, NM 87112 (505)291-9698 info@Ayurveda.com Ayurvedic and Naturopathic Medical Clinic 10025 NE 4th St Bellevue, WA 98004 (206)453-8022

B Bastyr University of Natural Health Sciences 144 NE 54th St Seattle, WA 98105 (206) 523-9585 Baylor College of Medicine 1 Baylor Plaza Houston, TX 77030 (713) 798-4951 Beck Institute GSB Building City Line and Belmont Aves, Ste. 700 Bala Cynwyd, PA 19004-1610 (610) 664-3020

Behcet’s Organization Worldwide Head Office PO Box 27 Watchet Somerset TA23 OYJ United Kingdom Bell’s Palsy Research Foundation 9121 E Tanque Verde, Ste. 105-286 Tucson, AZ 85749 (520) 749-4614 Beryllium Support Group PO Box 2021 Broomfield, CO 80038-2021 (303) 412-7065 Better Hearing Institute 515 King St, Ste. 420 Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 684-3391

United Kingdom (012) 52-810472

Organizations

Columbia SC 29205 (800) 445-8629

C California Colon Hygienist Society 333 Miller Ave, Ste. 1 Mill, Valley, CA 94941 (415) 383-7224 Canadian Society for Mucopolysaccharide and Related Diseases PO Box 64714 Unionville ONT L3R-OM9 Canada (905) 479-8701 (800) 667-1846

Biofeedback Certification Institute of America 10200 W 44th Ave, Ste. 310 Wheat Ridge, CO 80033 (303) 420-2902

Canadian HIV/AIDS Clearinghouse 1565 Carling Ave, Ste. 400 Ottawa ON K1Z 8R1 Canada (877) 999-7740

Bladder Health Council American Foundation for Urologic Disease 300 West Pratt St, Ste. 401 Baltimore, MD 21201 (800) 242-2383 (410) 727-2908

Canadian MEN Society PO Box 100 Meola Saskatchewan SOM 1XO Canada (306) 892-2080

Brain Aneurysm Foundation Inc 66 Canal St Boston, MA 02114 (617) 723-3870 Brain Injury Association of America 105 North Alfred St Alexandria, VA 22314 (800) 444-6443 Brain Tumor Information Services Box 405, Room J341 University of Chicago Hospitals 5841 S Maryland Ave Chicago, IL 60637 (312) 684-1400 British Leprosy Relief Association LEPRA Fairfax House Causton Road Colchester Essex CO1 1PU United Kingdom British Coalition of Heritable Disorders of Connective Tissue Rochester House 5 Aldershot Road Fleet Hampshire GU13 9NG

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Canadian 22q Group 320 Cote St Antoine West Montreal Quebec H3Y 2J4 Canada Cancer Care Inc 275 Seventh Ave New York, NY 10001 (800) 813-HOPE Cancer Group Institute 1814 NE Miami Gardens Dr North Miami Beach, FL 33179 (305) 651-5070 Cancer Research Institute (National Headquarters) 681 Fifth Ave New York, NY 10022 (800) 992-2623 Cancer Prevention Coalition 2121 West Taylor St Chicago, IL 60612 (312) 996-2297 Cancer Group Institute 17620 9th Ave NE 3609

Organizations

North Miami Beach, FL 33162 (305) 493-1980 Cancer Hope Network Ste. A Two North Rd Chester, NJ 07930 (877) HOPENET Cancer Information Service National Cancer Institute Building 31, Room 10A19 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20892 (800)4-CANCER

Center for Fertility and In Vitro Fertilization Loma Linda University 11370 Anderson St Loma Linda, CA 92354 (909) 796-4851

Charcot Marie Tooth Association (CMTA) 2700 Chestnut Parkway Chester, PA 19013 (610) 499-9264 (800) 606-CMTA Fax: (610) 499-9267 cmtassoc@aol.com <www.charcot-marie-tooth.org>

Center for Holistic Urology 161 Fort Washington Ave New York, NY 10032 (212) 305-0347

Child Abuse Prevention Center of Utah 2955 Harrison Blvd #102 Ogden UT 84403 (888) 273-0071

Center for Mind/Body Medicine PO Box 1048 La Jolla, CA 92038 (619)794-2425

CancerNet National Cancer Institute 9000 Rockville Pike Bldg 31, Rm 10A16 Bethesda, MD 20892 (800) 422-6237

Center for Mindfulness University of Massachusetts Medical Center 55 Lake Ave North Worcester, MA 01655 (508) 856-2656

Carcinoid Cancer Foundation Inc 1751 York Ave New York, NY 10128 (212) 722-3132

Center for Occupational and Environmental Medicine 7510 Northforest Dr North Charleston, SC 29420 (843) 572-1600

Cardiac Arrhythmia Research and Education Foundation (CARE) 2082 Michelson Dr #301 Irvine, CA 92612 (800) 404-9500

Center for the Study of Anorexia and Bulimia 1 W 91st St New York, NY 10024 (212) 595-3449

Celiac Disease Foundation 13251 Ventura Blvd, Ste. 1 Studio City, CA 91604-1838 (818) 990-2354

Center for Taste and Smell Disorders University of Colorado Health Sciences Center 4200 E Ninth Ave Denver, CO 80262 (303) 315-5660

Celiac Sprue Association/United State of America (CSA/USA) PO Box 31700 Omaha, NE 68131-0700 (402) 558-0600 Center for Cell and Gene Therapy Baylor College of Medicine 1102 Bates St, Ste. 1100 Houston, TX 77030-2399 (713) 770-4663 Center for Devices and Radiological Health United States Food and Drug Administration 1901 Chapman Ave Rockville, MD 20857 (301) 443-4109 3610

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 1600 Clifton Rd NE Atlanta, GA 30333 (800) 311-3435 (404) 639-3311

Childbirth Education Foundation PO Box 5 Richboro, PA 18954 (215) 357-2792 Children Living with Inherited Metabolic Diseases The Quadrangle Crewe Hall Weston Rd Crewe Cheshire CW1-6UR United Kingdom 127 025 0221 Fax: 0870-7700-327 Children’s Gaucher Research Fund PO Box 2123 Granite Bay, CA 95746-2123 (916) 797-3700 Fax: (916) 797-3707 Children’s Blood Foundation 333 East 38th St Room 830 New York, NY 10016-2745 (212) 297-4336 cfg@nyhmedcornell.edu Children’s Brittle Bone Foundation 7701 95th St Pleasant Prairie, WI 53158 (847) 433-498 Children’s Health Information Network 1561 Clark Dr Yardley, PA 19067 (215) 493-3068

Central Institute for the Deaf Washington University St Louis MO Chalice of Repose Project at St Patrick Hospital 312 East Pine St Missoula, MT 59802 (406) 329-2810 Fax: (406) 329-5614

Children’s Organ Transplant Association Inc 2501 COTA Dr Bloomington, IN 47403 (800) 366-2682 Children’s PKU Network (CPN) 3790 Via De La, VA lle, Ste. 120 Del Mar, CA 92014 (800) 377-6677

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Chromosome Deletion Outreach Inc PO Box 724 Boca Raton, FL 33429-0724 (888) 236-6680 Chromosome 18 Registry & Research Society 6302 Fox Head San Antonio, TX 78247 (210) 657-4968 Chronic Granulomatous Disease Association 2616 Monterey Road San Marino, CA 91108-1646 (818) 441-4118 Chronic Pain Outreach 822 Wycliff Ct Manassas, VA 22110 (703) 368-7357 CMT International 1 Springbank Dr St Catherine’s ONT L2S2K1 Canada (905) 687-3630 Cocaine Anonymous 6125 Washington Blvd, Ste. 202 Culver City, CA 90232 (800) 347-8998 Cochlear Implant Club International 5335 Wisconsin Ave NW, Ste. 440 Washington, DC 20015-2052 (202) 895-2781 College of American Pathologists 325 Waukegan Road Northfield, IL 60093 (800) 323-4040 College of Maharishi Ayur-Ved Maharishi International University 1000 4th St Fairfield, IA 52557 (515) 472-7000 Coma Recovery Association Inc 570 Elmont Rd, Ste. 104 Elmont, NY 11003 (516) 355-0951 Compassionate Friends PO Box 3696 Oak Brook, IL 60522 (877) 969-0010

Congenital Heart Anomalies Support Education and Resources (CHASER) 2112 North Wilkins Rd Swanton, OH 43558 (419) 825-5575 Congenital Heart Disease Information and Resources 1561 Clark Dr Yardley, PA 19067 Congenital Nevus Support Group 1400 South Joyce St Number C-1201 Arlington, VA 22202 (703) 920-3249 Cooley’s Anemia Foundation Inc 129-09 26th Ave #203 Flushing, NY 11354 (800) 522-7222 (718) 321-2873 Council for Homeopathic Certification PO Box 157 Corte Madera, CA 94976 Cri du Chat Society Dept of Human Genetics Box 33, MCV Station Richmond, VA 23298 (804) 786-9632 Crohn’s and Colitis Foundation of America Inc 386 Park Ave South 17th Floor New York, NY 10016-8804 (800) 932-2423 Cystic Fibrosis Foundation 6931 Arlington Road Bethesda, MD 20814 (800) 344-4823 Cystinuria Support Network 21001 NE 36th St Redmond, WA 98053 (425) 868-2996

D Deafness Research Foundation 1225 I St NW No 500 Washington, DC 20005 Depression After Delivery (DAD) PO Box 1282

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Morrisville, PA 19067 (800) 944-4773 Dermatology College of Medicine University of Iowa 200 Hawkins Dr Iowa City, IA 52242 (319) 356-2274 Dermatomyositis and Polymyositis Support Group 146 Newtown Road Southampton SO2 9HR United Kingdom Digestive Disease National Coalition 507 Capitol Court NE, Ste. 200 Washington, DC 20003 (202) 544-7497 Digestive Health Initiative 7910 Woodmont Ave #914 Bethesda, MD 20814 (800) 668-5237 Divers Alert Network The Peter B Bennett Center 6 West Colony Place Durham, NC 27705 (800) 446-2671

E Ear Foundation 1817 Patterson St Nashville, TN 37203 (800) 545-4327 Eating Disorder Awareness & Prevention Inc 603, Stewart St, Ste. 803 Seattle, WA 98101 (206) 382-3587 Edward Bach Centre Mount Vernon Bakers Lane Sotwell Oxon OX10 OPX United Kingdom centre@bachcentre.com Elhers-Danlos National Foundation 6399 Wilshire Blvd, Ste. 203 Los Angeles, CA 90048 (323) 651-3038 Fax: (323) 651-1366 Ehlers-Danlos Support Group - UK PO Box 335 Farnham Surrey GU10 1XJ 3611

Organizations

Chinese National Chi Kung Institute PO Box 31578 San Francisco, CA 94131 (800) 824-2433

Organizations

United Kingdom 01252 690 940

9500 Euclid Ave Cleveland, OH 44195-5001 (216) 444-6470

Emphysema Anonymous Inc PO Box 3224 Seminole, FL 34642 (813)391-9977

Family Caregiver Alliance 425 Bush St, Ste. 500 San Francisco, CA 94108 (800) 445-8106

Endocrine Society 4350 East West Highway, Ste. 500 Bethesda, MD 20814-4410 (301) 941-0200 Fax: (301) 941-0259 endostaff@endo-society.org Endometriosis Association International Headquarters 8585 North 76th Place Milwaukee, WI 53223 (800) 992-3636 Environmental Health Center 1025 Connecticut Ave NW Washington, DC 20036 (202) 293-2270 Epilepsy Concern International Service Group 1282 Wynnewood Dr West Palm Beach, FL 33417 (407) 683-0044 Epilepsy Foundation of America 4351 Garden City Dr, Ste. 406 Landover, MD 20785-2267 (301) 459-3700 (800) 332-1000 ERIC Clearinghouse on Assessment and Evaluation 1131 Shriver Laboratory Bldg 075 University of Maryland College Park, MD 20742 (800) 464-3742 Extracorporeal Life Support Organization 1327 Jones Dr, Ste. 101 Ann Arbor MI 48105 (734) 998-6600 EyesOnThePrizeOrg 446 S Anaheim Hills Road #108 Anaheim Hills, CA 92807

F Familial Polyposis Registry Department of Colorectal Surgery Cleveland Clinic Foundation 3612

Fax: (813) 287-2870 DrJoy@JohnsonMail.com Flower Essence Society PO Box 459 Nevada City, CA 95959 (800) 736-9222 (US & Canada) Fax: (530) 265-0584 mail@flowersociety.org

Fasting Center International 32 West Anapurna St #360 Santa Barbara, CA 93101

Food and Drug Administration Office of Inquiry and Consumer Information 5600 Fisher Lane Room 12-A-40 Rockville, MD 20857 (301) 827-4420

Federal Drug Administration 5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857 (800) 532-4440 Federation for Children With Special Needs 1135 Tremont St, Ste. 420 Boston, MA 02120 (617) 236-7210 Federation of Feminist Women’s Health Centers 1469 Humboldt Rd, Ste. 200 Chico, CA 96928 (530) 891-1911 Feldenkrais Guild of North America 3611 SW Hood Ave, Ste. 100 Portland, OR 97201 (800) 775-2118 (503) 221-6612 Fax: (503) 221-6616 Female Sexual Medicine Center UCLA Medical Center 924 Westwood Blvd, Ste. 520 Los Angeles, CA 90024 (310) 825-0025

Food and Nutrition Information Center 10301 Baltimore Blvd Room 304 Beltsville, MD 20705-2351 Foundation Fighting Blindness Executive Plaza I, Ste. 800 11350 McCormick Road Hunt, Valley, MD 21031-1014 (888) 394-3937 Foundation for Ichthyosis and Related Skin Types 650 N Cannon Ave, Ste. 17 Landsdale, PA 19446 (215) 631-1411 (800) 545-3286 Fax: (215) 631-1413 Frontier’s International Vitiligo Foundation 4 Rozina Court Owings Mills, MD 21117 (301) 594-0958

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Family Resource Institute PO Box 2525 Lynnwood, WA 98036 (253) 531-2878 (800) 999-3429 5p- Society 7108 Katella Ave. #502 Stanton,, CA 90680 (888) 970-0777 Florida Institute of Psychophysical Integration: Quantum Balance 5837 Mariner Dr Tampa, FL 33609-3411 (813) 186-2273

G Gamblers Anonymous International Service Office PO Box 17173 Los Angeles, CA 90017 (213) 386-8789 Fax: (213) 386-0030 Gay and Lesbian Medical Association 459 Fulton St, Ste. 107 San Francisco, CA 94102 (415) 225-4547

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Hearing Industries Association 1800 M St NW Washington, DC 20036 (202) 651-5258

GriefNet PO Box 3272 Ann Arbor MI 48106

Hearing Loss Link 2600 W Peterson Ave, Ste. 202 Chicago, IL 60659 (312) 743-1032 (312) 743-1007 (TDD)

Guide Dogs for the Blind PO Box 1200 San Rafael, CA 94915 (415) 499-4000 Guillain-Barré Syndrome Foundation International PO Box 262 Wynnewood, PA 19096 (610) 667-0131 (610) 667-0131 Gynecologic Cancer Foundation 401 North Michigan Ave Chicago, IL 60611 (800) 444-4441

H Hairy Cell Leukemia Research Foundation 2345 County Farm Lane Schaumburg, IL 60194 (800) 693-6173 HCF Nutrition Research Foundation Inc PO Box 22124 Lexington, KY 40522 (606) 276-3119 Head Injury Hotline PO Box 84151 Seattle, WA 98124 (206) 621- 8558 Head Trauma Support Project Inc 2500 Marconi Ave, Ste. 203 Sacramento, CA 95821 (916) 482-5770 Health Services and Resources Administration Division of Organ Transplantation Room 11A-22 5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857 Hear Now 9745 E Hampden Ave, Ste. 300 Denver, CO 80231 (800) 648-HEAR (202) 651-5258

Heimlich Institute PO Box 8858 Cincinnati, OH 45208 heimlich@iglou.com Hellerwork 406 Berry St Mt Shasta, CA 96067 (530) 926-2500 Hemochromatosis Foundation Inc PO Box 8569 Albany, NY 12208-0569 (518) 489-0972 skleiner@shivahuntercuny.edu Hepatitis B Foundation 101 Greenwood Ave, Ste. 570 Jenkintown, PA 19046 (215) 884-8786 info@hepb.org Herb Research Foundation 1007 Pearl St, Ste. 200 Boulder, CO 80302 (303) 449-2265 Hermansky-Pudlak Syndrome Network Inc One South Road Oyster Bay, NY 11771-1905 (800) 789-9477 appell@theonramp.net Hirshberg Foundation for Pancreatic Cancer Research 375 Homewood Rd Los Angeles, CA 90049 (310) 472-6310 Histiocytosis Association of America 302 North Broadway Pitman, NJ 08071 (800) 548-2758 (USA and Canada) Homeopathic Educational Services 2124B Kittredge St Berkeley, CA 94704 (510) 649-0294 Fax: (510) 649-1955

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Hospice Foundation of America 2001 S St NW, Ste. 300 Washington, DC 20009 (800) 854-3402 Hospicelink Hospice Education Institute 190 Westbrook Rd Essex, CT 06426-1510 (800) 331-1620 Human Growth Foundation 997 Glen Cove Ave Glen Head, NY 11545 (800) 451-6434 Hydrocephalus Foundation Inc (HyFI) 910 Rear Broadway Saugus, MA 01906 (781) 942-1161 HyFI1@netscape.net Hypoglycemia Association Inc 18008 New Hampshire Ave PO Box 165 Ashton, MD 20861-0165 Hypospadias Association of America 4950 S Yosemite St Box F2-156 Greenwood Village, CO 80111 hypospadiasassn@yahoo.com

I IgA Nephropathy Support Network 964 Brown Ave Huntington, Valley, PA 19006 (215) 663-0536 Immune Deficiency Foundation 25 W Chesapeake Ave, Ste. 206 Towson, MD 21204 (800) 296-4433 Impotence Institute of America Impotents Anonymous 10400 Little Patuxent Parkway, Ste. 485 Columbia, MD 21044-3502 (800) 669-1603 INFOLEP Leprosy Information Services Postbus 950051090 HA Amsterdam Netherlands Infolep@antenna.nl Inherited High Cholesterol Foundation 410 Chipeta Way 3613

Organizations

Gluten Intolerance Group PO Box 23053 Seattle, WA 98102-0353 (206) 325-6980

Organizations

Room 167 Salt Lake City UT 84104 (888) 244-2465 Insight Meditation Society 1230 Pleasant St Barre, MA 01005 (978) 355-4378 Fax: (978) 355-6398 Institute for Families with Blind Children PO Box 54700, Mail Stop 111 Los Angeles, CA 90054-0700 (213) 669-4649 Institute for Preventative Sports Medicine PO Box 7032 Ann Arbor, MI 48107 (313) 434-3390 International Association of Enterstomal Therapy 27241 La Paz Road, Ste. 121 Laguna Niguel, CA 92656 (714) 476-0268 International Association of Infant Massage PO Box 1045 Oak View, CA 93022 International Association of Laryngectomees (IAL) 7440 North Shadeland Ave, Ste. 100 Indianapolis, IN 46250 International Association for Medical Assistance to Travelers (IAMAT) 417 Center St Lewistown, NY 14092 (716) 754-4883 International Association of Parents and Professionals for Safe Alternatives in Childbirth Rte 1, Box 646 Marble Hill, MO 63764 (314) 238-2010 International Association of Reiki Professionals PO Box 481 Winchester, MA 01890 International Association of Yoga Therapists (IAYT) 4150 Tivoli Ave Los Angeles, CA 90066 International Bio-Oxidative Medicine Foundation (IBOMF) PO Box 891954 Oklahoma City OK 73109 3614

(405) 634-7855 Fax: (405) 634-7320 International Childbirth Education Association PO Box 20048 Minneapolis, MN 55420 (612) 854-8660 International Chi Kung/Qi Gong Directory 2730 29th St Boulder, CO 80301 (303) 442-3131 International Cesarean Awareness Network 1304 Kingsdale Ave Redondo Beach, CA 90278 (310) 542-6400 International Council for the Control of Iodine Deficiency Disorders 43 Circuit Road Chester Hill, MA 02167 (207) 335-2221

International Foundation for Homeopathy 2366 Eastlake Ave East #301 Seattle, WA 98102 (425)776-4147 International Institute of Infant Massage 605 Bledsoe Rd NW Albuquerque, NM 87107 (505) 341-9381 Fax: (505) 341-9386 International Institute of Reflexology PO Box 12642 St Petersburg, FL 33733-2642 (727) 343-4811 Fax: (727) 381-2807 fteflex@concentric.net International Lactation Consultants Association 201 Brown Ave Evanston, IL 60202 (708) 260-8874

International College of Applied Kinesiology PO Box 905 Lawrence KS 66044-9005 (913) 542-1801

International Lesch-Nyhan Disease Association 114 Winchester Way Shamong, NJ 08088-9398 (215) 677-4206

International Colour Vision Society: Forschungsstelle fuer Experimentelle Ophthalmologie Roentgenweg 11 Tuebingen D-72076 Germany

International Medical and Dental Hypnotherapy Association 4110 Edgeland, Ste. 800 Royal Oak MI 48073-2285

International Council for Medical and Clinical Therapists 7361 McWhorter Place, Ste. 300 Annandale, VA 22003-5469 International DiGeorge/VCF Support Network c/o Family Voices of New York 46 1/2 Clinton Ave Cortland, NY 13045 (607) 753-1250 International Eye Foundation 7801 Norfolk Ave Bethesda, MD 20814 (301) 986-1830 International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders PO Box 17864 Milwaukee, WI 53217 (888) 964-2001

International Myopia Prevention Association RD No 5, Box 171 Ligonier, PA 15658 (412) 238-2101 International NLP Trainers Association Ltd Coombe House Mill Road Fareham Hampshire PO16 0TN United Kingdom (044) 01489 571171 International Ozone Association Ind Pan American Group 31 Strawberry Hill Ave Stamford, CT 06902 (203) 348-3542 Fax: (203) 967-4845 International Polio Network 4207 Lindell Blvd, Ste. 110 St Louis, MO 63108-2915 (314) 534-0475 International Rett Syndrome Association 9121 Piscataway Road, Ste. 2B

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

International School of Shiatsu 10 South Clinton St Doylestown, PA 18901 International Tremor Foundation 7046 West 105th St Overland Park KS 66212 (913) 341-3880 Intersex Society PO Box 31791 San Francisco, CA 94131 Intestinal Health Institute 4427 East Fifth St Tucson, AZ 85711 (520) 325-9686 info@sheilas.com Irish Raynaud’s and Scleroderma Society PO Box 2958 Foxrock Dublin 18 Ireland (01) 235 0900 irss@indigo.ie Iron Disorders Institute Inc PO Box 3021 Greenville SC 29602 (864) 241-0111 irondis@aol.com Iron Overload Diseases Association Inc 433 Westwind Dr North Palm Beach, FL 33408 (561) 840-8512 iod@ironoverload.org

J Juvenile Diabetes Foundation 120 Wall St 19th Floor New York, NY 10005 (800) 533-2873

K Kids with Heart 1578 Careful Dr Green Bay, WI 54304 (800) 538-5390 Klinefelter Syndrome and Associates Inc PO Box 119

Roseville, CA 95678-0119 (916) 773-2999 (888) 999-9428 Fax: (916) 773-1449 ksinfo@geneticorg

Lighthouse National Center for Education 111 E 59th St New York, NY 10022 (800) 334-5497

Klinefelter’s Organization PO Box 60 Orpington BR68ZQ United Kingdom

Lighthouse National Center for Vision and Aging 111 E 59th St New York, NY 10022 (800) 334-5497

Komen Foundation 5005 LBJ Freeway, Ste. 250 Dallas, TX 75244 (972) 855-1600

Little People of America Inc National Headquarters PO Box 745 Lubbock, TX 79408 (806) 737-8186 (888) LPA-2001 lpadatabase@juno.com

L LaLeche League International 1400 N Meacham Rd Schaumburg, IL 60173-4048 (800) 525-3243 Late Onset Tay-Sachs Foundation 1303 Paper Mill Road Erdenheim, PA 19038 (800)672-2022 League for the Hard of Hearing 71 West 23rd St New York, NY 10010-4162 (212) 741-7650 Learning Disabilities Association of America 4156 Library Road Pittsburg, PA 15234 (412) 341-1515 Lesch-Nyhan Syndrome Registry New York University School of Medicine Department of Psychiatry 550 First Ave New York, NY 10012 (212) 263-6458 Leukaemia Research Fund 43 Great Ormond St London WC1N 3JJ United Kingdom (020) 7405-0101 Leukemia Society of America Inc 600 Third Ave New York, NY 10016 (800) 955 4572

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2

Lupus Foundation of America 1300 Piccard Dr, Ste. 200 Rockville, MD 20850 (800) 558-0121 Lyme Disease Network of New Jersey Inc 43 Winton Road East Brunswick, NJ 08816 Lymphoma Research Foundation 8800 Venice Blvd, Ste. 207 Los Angeles, CA 90034 (310) 204 7040

M March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation 1275 Mamaroneck Ave White Plains, NY 10605 (888) 663-4637 resourcecenter@modimes.org Massachusetts College of Emergency Physicians (MACEP) P O Box 296 Swansea, MA 02777 (508) 643-0117 Fax: (508) 643-0141 Massachusetts General Hospital Functional and, Ste.reotactic Neurosurgery Cingulotomy Unit Fruit St Boston, MA 02114 (617) 726-2000 3615

Organizations

Clinton, MD 20735 (800) 818-7388

Organizations

Méniére’s Network 1817 Patterson St Nashville, TN 37203 (800) 545-4327 Meningitis Foundation of America 7155 Shadeland Station, Ste. 190 Indianapolis, IN 46256-3922 (800) 668-1129 Metabolic Information Network PO Box 670847 Dallas, TX 75367-0847 (214) 696-2188 (800) 945-2188 Micronutrient Initiative (c/o International Development Research Centre) 250 Albert St Ottawa Ontario Canada K1G 3H9 (613) 236-6163, ext 2050 Midlife Women’s Network 5129 Logan Ave S Minneapolis, MN 55419 (800) 886-4354 Midwest Heart Specialists Physician Office Building 3825 Highland Ave Tower 2, Ste. 400 Downers Grove, IL 60515 (630) 719-4799 Milne Institute Inc PO Box 2716 Monterey, CA 93942-2716 (831) 649-1825 Fax: (831) 649-1826 Mind-Body Medical Institute Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center One Deaconess Road Boston, MA 02215 (617) 632-9525 milneinst@aol.com Mine Safety and Health Administration 4015 Wilson Blvd Arlington, VA 22203 (703) 235-1910 Mommies Enduring Neonatal Death (MEND) PO Box 1007 Coppell, TX 75067 (972) 459-2396 (888) 695-6363 3616 Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation 11 Forest St New Canaan, CT 06840 (203) 972-1250

National AIDS Treatment Advocacy Project 580 Broadway, Ste. 403 New York, NY 10012 (888) 266-2827

Muscular Dystrophy Association 3300 East Sunrise Dr Tucson, AZ 85718 (520) 529-2000 (800) 572-1717

National Alliance on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence Inc 12 West 21st St New York, NY 10010 (212) 206-6770 Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America 222 S Riverside Plaza, Ste. 1540 Chicago, IL 60606 (800) 541-5454



Myelin Project Headquarters 2001 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Ste. 225 Washington, DC 20006-1850 (202) 452-8994 Myelodysplastic Syndromes Foundation 464 Main St PO Box 477 Crosswicks, NJ 08515 (800) MDS-0839 National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations 9 East 37th St 10th Floor New York, NY 10016 (888) 806-2226 Fax: 212-689-1213

National Alliance for Breastfeeding Advocacy 254 Conant Rd Weston, MA 02193 (617) 893-3553 National Alliance of Methadone Advocates (NAMA) 435 Second Ave New York, NY 10010 (212) 595-6262 National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI) Colonial Place Three 2107 Wilson Blvd, Ste. 300 Arlington, VA 22201-3042 (800) 950-6264 Myopia International Research Foundation 1265 Broadway Room 608 New York, NY 10001 (212) 684-2777 Myositis Association of America 600-D University Blvd Harrisonburg, VA 22801 (540) 433-7686

National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression 60 Cutter Mill Road, Ste. 200 Great Neck, NY 11021 (516) 829-0091

National Animal Disease Center Zoonotic Research Unit 2300 Dayton Ave PO Box 70 Ames, IA 50010 N Nar-Anon Family Group Headquarters Inc PO Box 2562 Palos Verdes Peninsula, CA 90274 (310) 547-5800 National Anxiety Foundation 3135 Custer Dr Lexington, KY 40517 (606) 272-7166



Narcolepsy Network PO Box 42460 Cincinnati, OH 45242 (973) 276-0115 National Adrenal Disease Foundation 505 Northern Blvd, Ste. 200 Great Neck, NY 11021 (516) 487-4992 National Aphasia Association 156 5th Ave, Ste. 707 New York, NY 10010 (800) 922-4622



GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 National Association of CognitiveBehavioral Therapists PO Box 2195 Weirton WV 26062 (800) 853-1135



(800) 879-6282 (214) 637-6282 Fax: (214) 637-2206

National Attention Deficit Disorder Association (ADDA) 9930 Johnnycake Ridge Road, Ste. 3E Mentor, OH 44060 (800) 487-2282 National Association for Continence PO Box 8310 Spartanburg, SC 29305-8310 (800) 252-3337

National Autism Hotline c/o Autism Services Center PO Box 507 605 Ninth St Huntington, WV 25710 (304) 525-8014 National Association for the Deaf 814 Thayer Ave Silver Spring, MD 20910 (301) 587-1788 (301) 587-1789 (TDD)



National Birth Defects Prevention Network Atlanta, GA (770) 488-3550

National Association of Holistic Aromatherapy 836 Hanley Industrial Court St Louis, MO 63144 (888) ASK-NAHA

National Board for Hypnotherapy and Hypnotic Anaesthesiology 7841 West Ludlow Dr, Ste. A Peoria, AZ 85381

National Association for Proton Therapy 7910 Woodmont Ave, Ste. 1303 Bethesda, MD 20814 (301) 913-9360

National Breast Cancer Coalition 1707 L St NW, Ste. 1060 Washington, DC 20036 (800) 622-2838 Fax: 202-265-6854

National Association for Premenstrual Syndrome 7 Swift’s Court High St Seal Kent TN15 0EG United Kingdom +44 (0) 1732 760011

National Association for Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum 3500 East 12th Ave Denver, CO 80206 (303) 355-3866 Fax: (303) 355-3859 Pxenape@eStcom National Association for the Visually Handicapped 22 West 21st St New York, NY 10010 (212) 889-3141 National Athletic Trainers’ Association 2952, Stemmons Freeway Dallas, TX 75247-6916 National Cancer Institute Building 31, Room 10A31 31 Center Dr MSC 2580 Bethesda, MD 20892-2580 (800) 422-6237

National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (National Institutes of Health) PO Box 8218 Silver Spring, MD 20907-8218 (888) 644-6226 National Center for Nutrition and Dietetics American Dietetic Association 216 West Jackson Blvd, Ste. 800 Chicago, IL 60606-6995 (800) 366-1655 National Center for the Preservation of Medicinal Herbs 3350 Beech Grove Road Rutland, OH 45775 (740) 742-4401 National Center on Shaken Baby Syndrome 2955 Harrison Blvd #102 Ogden, UT 84403 (801) 627-3399

National Center on Sleep Disorders Research Two Rockledge Centre 6701 Rockledge Dr Bethesda, MD 20892 (301) 435-0199 National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork 8201 Greensboro Dr, Ste. 300 McLean, VA 22102 National Children’s Eye Care Foundation One Clinic Center A3-108 Cleveland, OH 44195 (216) 444-0488 National Cholesterol Education Program NHLBI Information Center PO Box 30105 Bethesda, MD 20824-0105 National Chronic Pain Outreach Association Inc PO Box 274 Millboro, VA 24460 (540) 997-5004 National Center for Homeopathy 801 North Fairfax St, Ste. 306 Alexandria, VA 22134 (703) 548-7790 National Clearinghouse for Alcohol and Drug Information 11426-28 Rockville Pike, Ste. 200 Rockville, MD 20852 (800) 729-6686



National Center for Learning Disabilities (NCLD) 381 Park Ave South, Ste. 1401 New York, NY 10016 (410) 296-0232

National Clearinghouse on Child Abuse and Neglect Information PO Box 1182 Washington, DC 20013-1182 (800) 394-3366

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 3617 Organizations National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and Associated Disorders Box 7 Highland Park, IL 60035 (708) 831-3438 Organizations National Coalition for Cancer Survivorship 1010 Wayne Ave 7th Floor Silver Spring, MD 20910-5600 (301) 650-9127 (877) NCCS-YES











National Committee to Prevent Child Abuse 200 S Michigan Ave 17th Floor Chicago, IL 60604 (312) 663-3520 National Congenital Port Wine Stain Foundation 123 East 63rd St New York, NY 10021 (516) 867-5137 National Council on Alcoholism and Drug Dependence 12 West 21st St New York, NY 10010 (800) 622-2255 National Depressive and ManicDepressive Association (NDMDA) 730 N Franklin St, Ste. 501 Chicago, IL 60610 (800) 826-3632 National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse 2 Information Way Bethesda, MD 20892-3570 nddic@aeriecom National Easter Seal Society 230 W Monroe St, Ste. 1800 Chicago, IL 60606-4802 (312) 726-6200 (800) 221-6827 National Eating Disorders Organization (NEDO) 6655 South Yale Ave Tulsa OK 74136 (918) 481-4044 National Enuresis Society 7777 Forest Lane, Ste. C-737 Dallas, TX 75230-2518 (800) 697-8080 National Eye Institute 2020 Vision Place Bethesda, MD 20892-3655 (301) 496-5248 3618 National Familial Pancreas Tumor Registry The Johns Hopkins Hospital 600 North Wolfe St Baltimore, MD 21287-6417 (410) 377-7450 National Federation of the Blind 1800 Johnson St Baltimore, MD 21230 (301) 569-9314 National Foundation for Vitiligo and Pigment Disorders 9032 South Normandy Dr Centerville, OH 45459 (513) 885-5739 National Fragile X Foundation PO Box 190488 San Francisco, CA 94119-0988 (800) 688-8765 (510) 763-6030 Fax: (510) 763-6223 natlfx@sprintmailcom

National Gaucher Foundation 11140 Rockville Pike, Ste. 350 Rockville, MD 20852-3106 (800) 925-8885 National Guild of Hypnotists PO Box 308 Merrimack NH National Head Injury Foundation 333 Turnpike Rd Southboro, MA 01722 (617) 485-9950 National Headache Foundation 428 W St James Place Chicago, IL 60614 (800) 843-2256 National Hearing Aid Society 20361 Middlebelt Livonia MI 48152 (800) 521-5247 (313) 478-2610 National Heart Lung and Blood Institute PO Box 30105 Bethesda, MD 20824-0105 (301) 251-1222 National Hemophilia Foundation 116 West 32nd St 11th Floor New York, NY 10001 (800) 42-HANDI National Human Genome Research Institute The National Institutes of Health 9000 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20892 (301) 496-2433

National Hypoglycemia Association Inc PO Box 120 Ridgewood, NJ 07451 (201) 670-1189 National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism (NIAAA) 6000 Executive Blvd Bethesda Maryland 20892-7003 National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease Building 31 Room 7A-50 31 Center Dr MSC 2520 Bethesda, MD 20892-2520 (301) 496-5717 National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases 9000 Rockville Pike Bldg 31, Rm 9A04 Bethesda, MD 20892 National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Bldg 31, Room 2A32 MSC 2425 31 Center Dr Bethesda, MD 20892-2425 (800) 505-2742 National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders National Institutes of Health 31 Center Dr MSC 2320 Bethesda, MD 20892-2320 National Institute of Dental Research 31 Center Dr MSC 2190 Building 31, Room 5B49 Bethesda, MD 20892-2190 National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases 31 Center Dr USC2560 Building 31, Room 9A-04 Bethesda, MD 20892-2560 (301) 496-3583 National Institute on Drug Abuse PO Box 30652 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 National Institute of General Medical Sciences Division of Pharmacology Physiology and Biological Chemistry 45 Center Dr MSC 6200 Bethesda, MD 20892-6200 National Lymphedema Network (NLN) 2211 Post St, Ste. 404 San Francisco, CA 94115 (800) 541-3259





National Mental Health Association 1021 Prince St Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 684-7722 Portland, OR 97223 (800) 723-9166

Organizations Bethesda, MD 20824-0652 (888) 644-6432



National Respiratory Distress Syndrome Foundation PO Box 723 Montgomeryville, PA 18936 National Safe Kids Campaign 1301 Pennsylvania Ave, Ste. 1000 Washington, DC 20004-1707

National Institute of Mental Health Mental Health Public Inquiries 5600 Fishers Lane Room 15C-05 Rockville, MD 20857 (888) 826-9438

National MPS Society 102 Aspen Dr Downingtown, PA 19335 (610) 942-0100 Fax: (610) 942-7188 info@mpssocietyorg

National Institute of Mental Health Panic Campaign Rm 15C-05 5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857 (800) 647-2642

National Necrotizing Fascitis Foundation PO Box 145 Niantic, CT 06357 (616) 261-2538

National Society of Genetic Counselors 233 Canterbury Dr Wallingford, PA 19086-6617 (610) 872-1192

National Organization for Albinism and Hypopigmentation (NOAH) 1530 Locust St #29 Philadelphia, PA 19102-4415 (800) 473-2310

National Society to Prevent Blindness 500 East Remington Rd Schaumburg, IL 60173 (708) 843-2020 (800) 331-2020

National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD) PO Box 8923 New Fairfield, CT 06812-8923 (203) 746-6518 (800) 999-6673 Fax: (203)746-6481

National Stroke Association 9707 E Easter Lane Englewood, CO 80112 (800) 787-6537

National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke PO Box 5801 Bethesda, MD 20824 (800) 352-9424

National Jewish Center for Immunology and Respiratory Medicine 1400 Jackson St Denver, CO 80206 (800) 222-5864 National Kidney Foundation 30 East 33rd St New York, NY 10016 (800) 622-9010 National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Information Clearinghouse 3 Information Way Bethesda, MD 20892 (800) 891-5390 National Lead Information Center National Safety Council 1025 Connecticut Ave NW, Ste. 1200 Washington, DC 20036 (800) 532-3394 National Osteoporosis Foundation 1150 17th St NW, Ste. 500 Washington, DC 20036-4603

National Pancreas Foundation PO Box 935 Wexford, PA 15090-0935 National Parkinson Foundation 1501 NW Ninth Ave Bob Hope Road Miami, FL 33136 National Prostate Cancer Coalition 1156 15th St NW Washington, DC 20005 (202) 463-9455 National Psoriasis Foundation 6600 SW 92nd Ave, Ste. 300 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 National Sleep Foundation 1522 K St NW, Ste. 500 Washington, DC 20005



National Tay-Sachs and Allied Diseases Association 2001 Beacon St, Ste. 204 Brookline, MA 02146 (800) 906-8723

National Tourette Syndrome Association Inc 42-40 Bell Blvd Bayside, NY 11361-2820 (718) 224-2999 Fax: (718) 279-9596 National, Vaginitis Association 117 South Cook St, Ste. 315 Barrington, IL 60010 (800) 909-8745 tourette@ixnetcom.comVagAssoc@aol.com National Vitiligo Foundation PO Box 6337 Tyler, TX 75703 (903) 531-9767 3619 Organizations National Women’s Health Resource Center 120 Albany St, Ste. 820 New Brunswick, NJ 08901 (877) 986-9472 7307133@compuserve.com



Neuropathy Association 60 E 42nd St, Ste. 942 New York, NY 10165 (212) 692-0662 North American Society of Homeopaths 10700 Old County Rd 15 #350 Minneapolis, MN 55441 (612) 593-9458 North American Vegetarian Society (NAVS) PO Box 72 Dolgeville, NY 13329 (518) 568-7970 Northeastern T’ai Chi Chuan Association 163 West 23rd St 5th Floor New York, NY 10011 (212) 741-1922 Northwest Center for Environmental Medicine 177 NE 102nd St Portland, OR 97220 (503) 561-0966 O Obsessive-Compulsive Anonymous PO Box 215 New Hyde Park, NY 11040 (516) 741-4901

west24th@aol.com Office on Smoking and Health Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Mailstop K-50 4770 Buford Highway NE Atlanta, GA 30341-3724 (800) 232-1311 Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf War Illnesses 5113 Leesburg Pike, Ste. 901 Falls Church, VA 22041 (703) 578-8518 Optician Association of America 7023 Little River Turnpike, Ste. 207 Annandale, VA 22003 3620 (703) 916-8856

Oral Health Education Foundation Inc 5865 Colonist Dr PO Box 396 Fairburn, GA 30213 (770) 969-7400 Osteoporosis and Related Bone Diseases-National Resource Center 1150 17th S NW, Ste. 500 Washington, DC 20036 (800) 624-2663 Overeaters Anonymous World Service Office 6075 Zenith, CT NE Rio Rancho NM 87124 (505) 891-2664 P Polycystic Kidney Disease Foundation 4901 Main St Kansas City, MO 64112-2634 (800) PKD-CURE



Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome Association PO Box 80517 Portland, OR 97280 (877) 775-7267 info@pcossupport.org Postpartum Support International 927 North Kellog Ave Santa Barbara, CA 93111 (805) 967-7636 Prader-Willi Foundation 223 Main St Port Washington, NY 11050 (800)253-7993 Paget Foundation 200, VA rick St, Ste. 1004 New York, NY 10014-4810 (800)23-PAGET Prader-Willi Syndrome Association(USA) 5700 Midnight Pass Rd Sarasota, FL 34242 (800) 926-4797



Parents Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays 1726 M St NW, Ste. 400 Washington, DC 20036 (202) 467-8180

Pediatric/Adolescent Gastroesophageal Reflux Association Inc PO Box 1153 Germantown, MD 20875-1153 (301) 601-9541 Periodic Paralysis Association 5225 Canyon Crest Dr #71-351 Riverside, CA 92507 (909) 781-4401 Phoenix Project/Head Injury Hotline Box 84151 Seattle, WA 98124 (206)621-8558 Pilates Studio 2121 Broadway, Ste. 201 New York, NY 10023-1786 (800)474-5283 (888) 474-5283 (212)875-0189 Fax: (212) 769-2368 Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc 810 Seventh Ave New York, NY 10019 (800) 669-0156

Pregnancy and Infant Loss Support (SHARE) St Joseph Health Center 300 First Capitol Dr St Charles, MO 63301 (800) 821-6819

Prevent Blindness America 500 East Remington Road Schaumburg, IL 60173 (800) 331-2020 Project Inform 205 13th St #2001 San Francisco, CA 94103 (800) 822-7422 Prostate Health Council American Foundation for Urologic Disease 1128 N Charles St Baltimore, MD 21201-5559 (800) 828-7866 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Pulmonary Fibrosis Foundation 1075 Santa Fe Dr Denver, CO 80204 (720) 932-7850



Pulmonary Hypertension Association PO Box 24733 Speedway, IN 46224-0733 (800) 748-7274 PXE International Inc 23 Mountain St Sharon, MA 02067 (781) 784-3817 Fax: (781) 784-6672 PXEInter@aol.com Q Qigong Human Life Research Foundation PO Box 5327 Cleveland, OH 44101 (216) 475-4712 R Radiological Society of North America 820 Jorie Blvd Oak Brook, IL 60523-2251 (630) 571-2670



Rainbows Down Under—A Trisomy 18 and Trisomy 13 Resource SOFT Australia 198 Oak Rd Kirrawee NSW 2232 Australia 02-9521-6039 United Kingdom (44) (0) 1270 872776

webmaster@raynaudsdemon.co.uk Reflexology Association of America 4012 Rainbow St KPMB#585 Las Vegas, NV 89103-2059 Rehabilitation International 25 East 21st St New York, NY 10010 (212) 420-1500 Resolve 1310 Broadway Somerville, MA 02144-1731 (617) 623-0744 Restless Legs Syndrome Foundation 1904 Banbury Road Raleigh, NC 27608-4428 (919) 781-4428 Retinoblastoma International 4650 Sunset Blvd Mail Stop #88 Los Angeles, CA 90027 (323) 669-2299 info@retinoblastoma.net Retinoblastoma Society Saint Bartholomew’s Hospital London EC1A 7BE United Kingdom 020 7600 3309 Fax: 020 7600 8579 Rocky Mountain Institute of Yoga and Ayurveda PO Box 1091 Boulder, CO 80306 (303)443-6923 Rolf Institute of Structural Integration 209 Canyon Blvd PO Box 1868 Boulder, CO 80306-1868 (303) 449-5903 (800) 530-8875 Rape Abuse and Incest National Network 635-B Pennsylvania Ave SE Washington, DC 20003 (800) 656-HOPE Raynaud’s & Scleroderma Association (UK) 112 Crewe Road Alsager Cheshire ST7 2JA S Schizophrenics Anonymous 15920 W Twelve Mile Southfield MI 48076 (248) 477-1983 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Scleroderma Foundation 12 Kent Way, Ste. 101 Byfield, MA 01922 (978) 463-5843 (800) 722-HOPE Fax: (978) 463-5809







Organizations Prostatitis Foundation Information Distribution Center 2029 Ireland Grove Park Bloomington, IL 61704 (309) 664-6222



Second Wind Lung Transplant Association Inc 9030 West Lakeview Court Crystal River, FL 34428 (888) 222-2690

Self Help for Hard of Hearing People Inc 7800 Wisconsin Ave Bethesda, MD 20814 (301) 657-2248 Sensory Integration International/The Ayres Clinic 1514 Cabrillo Ave Torrance, CA 90501-2817 Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States 130 W 42nd St, Ste. 350 New York, NY 10036 (212) 819-9770 Shriners Hospitals for Children International Shrine Headquarters 2900 Rocky Point Dr Tampa, FL 33607-1460 (813) 281-0300 Shy-Drager Syndrome Support Group 2004 Howard Lane Austin, TX 78728 (800) 288-5582 Sickle Cell Disease Association of America Inc 200 Corporate Point, Ste. 495 Culver City, CA 90230-8727 (800) 421-8453 Scdaa@sicklecelldisease.org Society for Light Treatment and Biological Rhythms PO Box 591687 174 Cook St San Francisco, CA 94159-1687 Society for Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Inc Ste. #5065 Johns Hopkins Outpatient Center 601 N Caroline St 3621 Organizations Baltimore, MD 21287 (800) 457-4777



Society of Neuro-Lingustic Programming PO Box 424 Hopatcong, NJ 07843 (201) 770-3600 Society for Mucopolysaccharide Diseases 46 Woodside Rd Amersham Buckinghamshire HP6 6AJ United Kingdom +44 (01494) 434156 Society of Nuclear Medicine 1850 Samuel Morse Dr Reston, VA 10016 (703) 708-9000 Spina Bifida Association of America 4590 MacArthur Blvd NW, Ste. 250 Washington, DC 20007-4226 (800) 621-3141 (202) 944-3285 Fax: (202) 944-3295 Spine Center 1911 Arch St Philadelphia, PA 19103 (215) 665-8300 SPOHNC Support for People with Oral and Head and Neck Cancer PO Box 53 Locust, Valley, NY 11560-0053 (800) 377-0928 Sudden Arrhythimia Death Syndromes Foundation 540 Arapeen Dr, Ste. 207 Salt Lake City UT 84108 (800) STOP SAD Sudden Infant Death Syndrome Alliance 1314 Bedford Ave, Ste. 210 Baltimore, MD 21208 (800) 221-7437 Support Organization for Trisomy 18 13 and Related Disorders (SOFT) 2982 South Union St Rochester, NY 14624 (800) 716-7638 3622 T Tardive Dyskinesia/Tardive Dystonia National Association PO Box 45732 Seattle, WA 98145-0732 (206) 522-3166 Texas Heart Institute Heart Information Service PO Box 20345 Houston, TX 77225-0345 (800) 292-2221

Thyroid Foundation of America Inc Ruth Sleeper Hall RSL350 40 Parkman St Boston, MA 02114-2698 (800) 832-8321 Thyroid Society for Education and Research 7515 South Main St, Ste. 545 Houston, TX 77030 (800) 849-7643 Tourette Syndrome Foundation of Canada 194 Jarvis St #206 Toronto ONT M5B 2B7 Canada (800) 361-3120 tsfcorg@sympatico.ca Trigeminal Neuralgia/Tic Douloureux Association PO Box 340 Barnegat Light, NJ 08006 (609) 361-1014 Turner Syndrome Society of England 2 Mayfield Ave London W41PW United Kingdom 44 (0)181-994 7625 Fax: 44 (0)181-995 9075

U Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society 10531 Metropolitan Ave Kensington, MD 20895 (301) 942-2980

United Cerebral Palsy Association Inc (UCP) 1660 L St NW, Ste. 700 Washington, DC 20036-5602 (202)776-0406 (800)872-5827 United Network for Organ Sharing 1100 Boulders Parkway, Ste. 500 PO Box 13770 Richmond, VA 23225-8770 (804) 330-8500 Trager Institute 21 Locust Ave Mill, Valley, CA 94941-2806 (415) 388-2688 Fax: (415) 399-2710

admin@trager.com United Ostomy Association Inc (UOA) 19772 MacArthur Blvd, Ste. 200 Irvine, CA 92612-2405 (800) 826-0826

Trans-Hyperboreau Institute of Science PO Box 2344 Sausalito, CA 94966 (415) 331-0230 (800) 485-8095 Fax: (415) 331-0231 United Plant Savers PO Box 98 East Barre VT 05649 (802)479-9825



Transverse Myelitis Association 1787 Sutter Parkway Powell, OH 43065-8806 (614) 766-1806

United States Department of Health and Human Services 200 Independence Ave SW Washington, DC 20201 (877) 696-6775

Trichotillomania Learning Center Inc 1215 Mission St, Ste. 2 Santa Cruz, CA 95060 (831) 457-1004 Fax: (831) 426-4383

United States Department of Justice Drug Enforcement Administration 2401 Jefferson Davis Highway Alexandria, VA 22301 (888) 644-6432

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Viagra Information



United States National Library of Medicine 8600 Rockville Pike Bethesda, MD 20894 (888) 346-3656 United States Renal Data System (USRDS) The University of Michigan 315 W Huron, Ste. 240 Ann Arbor MI 48103 (734) 998-6611 University of California Los Angeles Harbor-UCLA Medical Center Research and Education Institute 1124 W Carson St B-4 South Torrance, CA 90502 University of Illinois Center for Narcolepsy Research 845 S Damen Ave Chicago, IL 60612 (312) 996-5176 Upledger Institute 11211 Prosperity Farms Rd Palm Beach Gardens, FL 33410 (800) 233-5880 Fax: (561) 622-4771 V Vestibular Disorders Association PO Box 4467 Portland, OR 97208-4467 (503) 229-7705

Veterans Administration Persian Gulf Medical Information Helpline 400 South 18th St St Louis, MO 63103-2271 (800)749-8387 W Wegener’s Foundation Inc 3705 South George Mason Dr, Ste. 1813 South Falls Church, VA 22041 (703) 931-5852 Wegener’s Granulomatosis Support Group Inc PO Box 28660 Kansas City, MO 64188-8660 (800) 277-9474



Weight-Control Information Network 1 Win Way Bethesda, MD 20896-3665 (301) 951-1120 Wellness Community 35 E Seventh St, Ste. 412 Cincinnati, OH 45202 (888) 793-9355 Wilderness Medical Society PO Box 2463 Indianapolis, IN 46204 (317) 631-1745 Wilderness Medicine Institute PO Box 9 413 Main St Pitkin, CO 81241 (970) 641-3572 Wilson’s Disease Association 4 Navaho Dr Brookfield, CT 06804 (800) 399-0266 Women’s Cancer Network c/o Gynecologic Cancer Foundation 401 N Michigan Ave Chicago, IL 60611 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 (312) 644-6610



World Hypnosis Organization Inc 2521 W Montrose Ave Chicago, IL 60618 Worldwide Education and Awareness for Movement Disorders One Gustave L Levy Place Box 1052 New York, NY 10029 (800) 437-6683 Wound Care Institute 1100 NE 163rd St, Ste. #101 North Miami Beach, FL 33162 (305) 919-9192 Wound Healing Society 1550 South Coast Highway, Ste. 201 Laguna Beach, CA 92651 (888) 434-4234 Wright State University Aerospace Medicine Program PO Box 92 Dayton, OH 45401-0927 (937) 276-8338 Y Y-ME National Organization for Breast Cancer Information and Support 18220 Harwood Ave Homewood, IL 60430 (800) 221-2141 (708) 799-8228 Z Zain Hansen MPS Foundation 23400 Henderson Rd Covelo, CA 95420 (800) 767-3121 3623 Organizations United States Department of Justice Office for Victims of Crime 810 7th St NW Washington, DC 20531 INDEX References to individual volumes are listed as roman numerals; numbers following a colon refer to page numbers. Boldface volume and page numbers indicate main topical essays. Images are highlighted with an italicized page number; tables are further distinguished with an italicized “t” as are illustrations with an italicized “f”. 2C9 enzyme, IV:2574 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors. See HMGCoA inhibitors 3,4,5 trimethoxypheneltylamine. See Mescaline 3TC. See Lamivudine 5-fluorouracil for anal cancer, I:171 for anal warts, I:173 for cancer, II:740 for gallbladder cancer, III:1380 for genital warts, III:1444 for laryngeal cancer, III:1963 for liver cancer, III:2021 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472, 2476 for papillomavirus, IV:2542 for penile cancer, IV:2530 for rectal cancer, IV:2831 for stomach cancer, IV:3167 5-HIAA. See 5-hydroxy indole acetic acid 6-MP. See Mercaptopurine 8-methyloxypsoralen, II:976 A A-mode ultrasonography, I:4, II:1258 A-T. See Ataxia telangiectasia A-T mutated. See ATM A-T Project Foundation, I:388 AA. See Alcoholics Anonymous AABB. See American Association of Blood Banks AAMFT. See American Association of Marriage and Family Therapy AANP. See American Association for Naturopathic Physicians Aaron’s rod. See Mullein AASECT. See American Association of Sexual Educators, Counselors, and Therapists AAT. See Alpha-1-antitrypsin; alpha-1Antitrypsin; Pet therapy Aativan. See Lorazepam Abacavir for AIDS, I:80 hypersensitivity and, I:304 Abana, for ischemia, III:1871 Abbokinase. See Urokinase ABC. See Abacavir ABCC6 gene, IV:2753 Abdomen CAT scan of, II:875 in ectopic pregnancy, II:1130 fluid in, I:371–373 (See also Ascites) from congestive cardiomyopathy, II:896 from heart failure, III:1539 paracentesis for, IV:2490 in Heimlich maneuver, III:1564 mass in, ultrasonography for, I:1–2 obstruction of, x-rays for, III:1923–1924 palpation of, for pyelonephritis, IV:2789 physical examination of, IV:2594 reduced blood supply, ileus from, III:1779 ultrasound of, I:1–5 x-rays of, III:1923–1924 for hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 for splenic trauma, IV:3141 Abdominal aneurysmectomy. See Aneurysmectomy Abdominal aortic aneurysm, I:325 aneurysmectomy for, I:193 ultrasonography for, I:2, 5 Abdominal cancer from chronic leukemia, III:1992 lymphomas from, III:2092 Abdominal compression resuscitation. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Abdominal hernia. See Hernia Abdominal hysterectomy, III:1762 Abdominal infection brain abscess from, I:566 lung abscess from, III:2039 paracentesis for, IV:2489 Abdominal injuries GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 ascites from, I:371 enterostomy for, II:1209 placental abruption from, IV:2612 splenic trauma from, IV:3141 ultrasonography for, I:1 Abdominal muscles in childbirth, II:757 defects in, I:5–6, I:128 surgery of, for hernias, I:6, III:1625–1627 Abdominal pain from allergic purpura, I:110 amylase tests for, I:160 from aortic aneurysm, I:325 from aortic dissection, I:327 with appendicitis, I:341, 342 from Chagas’ disease, II:727 from colic, II:847 from complement deficiencies, II:874 vs. constipation, II:906 from cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:980 from Depo-Provera, II:1032 with dyspepsia, II:1119 EGD for, II:1246 from food poisoning, II:1353–1354, 1355 from gallbladder cancer, III:1379 gallbladder x-rays for, III:1382 from gastric acid, III:1400 with gastrinomas, III:1403 from Helicobacter pylori, III:1566 from hemolytic anemia, III:1579 from hepatitis A, III:1596 from hookworm disease, III:1667 from HSG, III:1766 from hypercalcemia, III:1697 from hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1707 hypotonic duodenography for, III:1759 from IBS, III:1865 from intussusception, III:1855–1856 nausea with, IV:2324 from neuroblastoma, IV:2341 from PMS, IV:2710 with pregnancy, IV:2697 from splenic trauma, IV:3141 3625 Abdominal pain from tapeworm disease, V:3239, 3240 ultrasonography for, I:1, 5 Abdominal pregnancy. See Ectopic pregnancy Abdominal surgery ascites from, I:371 atelectasis from, I:390 deep vein thrombosis after, II:1013 ileus from, III:1779 laparoscopic, III:1947–1949 for obesity, IV:2378–2380 ondansetron after, II:643 Abdominal tap. See Paracentesis Abdominal tumors, I:1–2 Abdominal ultrasound, I:1–5 Abdominal wall. See Abdominal muscles Abdominoperineal resection, I:171 Abelcet. See Amphotericin B Abetalipoproteinemia, III:1741 ABHM. See American Board of Holistic Medicine Ability tests. See Aptitude tests Ablation alcohol, III:2021 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:408 catheter (See Catheter ablation) endometrial (See Endometrial ablation) laser (See Laser ablation) transurethral needle (See Transurethral needle ablation) ABO blood-group system in blood donation, I:525 in erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1228 in heart transplantation, III:1546 ABO typing. See Blood typing Abortion after amniocentesis, I:154 controversy, I:7, 12 D & C for, II:1075 induced, PID and, IV:2522 mifepristone for, III:2186 partial birth, I:6–8 selective, I:8–9 therapeutic, I:9–12, 10f ABPA. See Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis Abrasions. See Wounds Abruptio placentae, IV:2611 Abscess, I:12–15, 15f anal (See Anal abscess) from animal bite infections, I:206, 207 anorectal, I:210–211 from appendicitis, I:340 from Bartholin’s gland cyst, I:449, 450 brain (See Brain abscess) from cancer, II:641 3626 CAT scan of, II:875 from cholecystectomy, II:778 from CNS infections, II:689, 690 from cross infection, III:1675 debridement for, II:1007 from enterostomies, II:1211 from erysipelas, II:1225 with female genital mutilation, II:1307 from filariasis, II:1331 flushing of, V:3580 from gonorrhea, III:1472 intestinal (See Intestinal abscess) from keratitis, III:1905 from listeriosis, III:2014 liver (See Liver, abscess of) lung (See Lung abscess) from lymphadenitis, III:2064 from lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 from melioidosis, III:2150 from mycobacterial infections, III:2277 pancreatic (See Pancreatic abscess) papilledema from, IV:2488 parapharyngeal (See Throat abscess) pelvic (See Pelvic abscess) periodontal (See Periodontal abscess) peritonsillar (See Throat abscess) pilonidal (See Pilonidal abscess) prostate, IV:2741 psoas (See Psoas abscess) from regional anesthesia, I:191 retropharyngeal (See Throat abscess) spinal cord (See Spinal cord abscess) splenectomy for, IV:3138 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3156 throat (See Throat abscess) from tonsillitis, V:3328 tooth (See Tooth abscess) tuboovarian, IV:2521 ultrasonography for, I:2 Abscess drainage, I:14, I:15–16 for acute lymphangitis, I:47 for anaerobic infections, I:168 for animal bite infections, I:207 for anorectal abscesses, I:211 bacteremia from, I:436 for Bartholin’s gland abscess, I:449, 450 for CNS infections, II:690 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 for skin lesions, IV:3076 for stye, II:1272 Absence seizures, IV:2985 Absidia, mucormycosis from, III:2232 Absorption with obesity surgery, IV:2379 sodium for, III:1742 Abstinence (Sexual). See Sexual abstinence Abstract reasoning in dementia, II:1025 Stanford-Binet intelligence scale for, IV:3153 Abuse, I:16–18 child (See Child abuse) physical (See Physical abuse) sexual (See Sexual abuse) substance (See Substance abuse) ABVD chemotherapy, III:1646 Academic disorders. See Learning disorders Acamprosate, for alcoholism, I:98 Acanthamoeba, II:922 Acanthamoeba keratitis, III:1905 Acanthosis nigricans, III:1715 Acarbose, for diabetes mellitus, I:262 Accidental death. See Death Accidental drug overdose. See Drug overdose Accidental falls from electric shock injuries, II:1143 joint replacement for, III:1890 in multiple sclerosis, III:2252 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 nasal trauma from, IV:2317 pelvic fractures from, IV:2520 senior’s health and, IV:2996–2997, 2999, 3001 subdural hematoma from, IV:3204 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 Accidental poisoning. See Poisoning Accidents amputations after, V:3377 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 car (See Traffic accidents) gangrene from, III:1394 hair transplantation for, III:1499 IV therapy after, III:1853, IV:2370 jaw fixation for, III:1885 malocclusion from, III:2106 in men, III:2164 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 pneumothorax from, IV:2641 PTSD from, IV:2685 spinal cord injuries from, IV:3128 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3201, 3203–3204 torticollis from, V:3340 traction and, V:3357 Acclimatization, to high altitudes, I:134 Accolate. See Zafirlukast Accommodative insufficiency, vision training for, V:3508 Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health Care, III:1426 Accupril. See Quinapril Accutane. See Isotretinoin GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 for influenza, III:1835 with interferons, III:1793 kidney damage from, IV:2337 lactic acidosis from, III:1945 for laryngitis, III:1957 for liver biopsy, III:2018 liver failure from, III:2028 for mastitis, III:2132 for measles, III:2140 for migraines, III:2188 for mumps, III:2256 for neuralgia, IV:2339 with opioid analgesics, I:175 for osteoarthritis, IV:2413 overdose, II:1104, 1106 for pain, I:174, IV:2460, 2462 for palliative cancer therapy, II:642 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 with penicillins, IV:2529 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for roseola, IV:2920 for RSV, IV:2868 for rubella, IV:2927 for sciatica, IV:2964 for sinusitis, IV:3058 for sore throats, IV:3119 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 for tension headache, V:3255 for toothache, V:3337 for toxoplasmosis, V:3349 uric acid tests and, V:3442 for vasectomy, V:3482 Acetanilid, III:1465 Acetate, alcohol and, I:93 Acetazolamide for altitude sickness prevention, I:134 for cystinuria, II:991 for glaucoma, III:1459 with methenamine, V:3449 for periodic paralysis, IV:2545 Acetazoleamide for altitude sickness, V:3562 Acetic acid, for otitis externa, IV:2432 Acetohexamide, for diabetes mellitus, II:1051 Acetylcarnitine, for Alzheimer’s disease, I:139, II:1026 Acetylcholine in Alzheimer’s disease, II:1026 botulinum toxin and, I:559, 560 cholinergic agents as, II:794–795 insecticides and, III:1841 with sphincter electromyography, II:1255 Acetylcholinesterase in Alzheimer’s disease, I:135 cholinergic agents for, II:794 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 insecticide poisoning and, III:1841, 1842 Acetylcysteine, II:989 N-Acetylglucosamine-4-sulfatase deficiency, III:2229, 2230 Acetylsalicylic acid. See Aspirin Achalasia, I:20–21 with esophageal cancer, II:1240 from esophageal diverticulum, II:1244 manometry for, II:1242 sildenafil citrate for, IV:3052 Achenbach Child Behavior Rating Scales, I:412 Achievement tests, IV:2763, 2764 Achillea millefolium. See Yarrow Achilles tendon inflammation. See Tendinitis Achillia millefoilium. See Yarrow Achlorhydria, with systemic antifungal drugs, I:268 Achondroplasia, I:21–22 achondroplasia as, I:22 from dominant inheritance, I:491 genetic mutation and, III:1433 Achromatopsia. See Color blindness Achromycin. See Tetracyclines Acid. See Lysergic acid diethylamide Acid-base equilibrium blood gas analysis for, I:527 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 kidney function tests for, III:1912 lactic acid test for, III:1944 Acid-base imbalance in acidosis, III:2179 in drug overdose, II:1105, 1106 in electrolyte disorders, II:1153–1156 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290, 1291 from hyperphosphatemia, II:1159 in metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 in renal tubular acidosis, IV:2857–2858 in respiratory acidosis, IV:2861–2862 in respiratory alkalosis, IV:2862 Acid blockers. See Antacids Acid-fast bacilli, with leprosy, III:1978 Acid indigestion. See Indigestion Acid maltase deficiency, III:1466 Acid phosphatase, I:23, I:23 Acid rebound, I:218 Acidophilus for balanitis, I:440 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for histoplasmosis, III:1641 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for strep throat, IV:3179 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Acidosis, III:2179–2180 amino acid screening for, I:148–149 3627 Acidosis Ace bandage. See Elastic bandages ACE inhibitors. See Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors Ace test, for diabetes mellitus, II:1050 Acebutolol for coronary heart disease, II:931 for hypertension, I:279–281 Aceon. See Perindopril Acetabulum in congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 in hip replacement, III:1891 Acetaminophen, I:18–20 alanine aminotransferase levels from, III:2024 alemtuzumab and, I:102 for altitude sickness, V:3562 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:138 with anticonvulsants, I:255 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with antimigraine agents, I:289 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 for asbestosis, I:370 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 for bacillary angiomatosis, I:435 for bronchitis, I:599 for burns, I:618 for cat-scratch disease, II:670 for cellulitis, II:685 for chickenpox, II:751 for children, II:764 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for cold sores, II:845 for colposcopy, II:865 for common cold, II:871 with croup, II:960 for cryotherapy, II:963 after cystoscopy, II:997 delirium from, II:1021 for dental trauma, II:1029 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 drug-induced hepatitis from, III:1607 for dysmenorrhea, II:1117 for encephalitis, II:1179 for endometriosis, II:1194 erythema multiforme from, II:1226 with erythromycin, II:1233 with estrogens, III:1670 after eye muscle surgery, II:1269 for fever, II:1314, 1315, IV:2907, V:3591 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for fifth disease, II:1329 for gallstones, III:1389 for ganglion, III:1392 for hand-foot-mouth disease, III:1507 for headache, III:1524 for histoplasmosis, III:1640–1641 with hydroxyzine, I:286 Acidosis diabetic ketoacidosis and, II:1055 from drug overdose, II:1105 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 from growth hormone stimulation test, III:1489 hyperkalemia from, III:1705 with hypernatremia, III:1710 from near drowning, IV:2327 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 from overhydration, IV:2449 renal tubular (See Renal tubular acidosis) respiratory (See Respiratory acidosis) respiratory alkalosis and, IV:2862 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3310 urinalysis for, V:3445 Acids amino (See Amino acids) bile, in diarrhea, II:1066 fatty (See Fatty acids) ipecac and, III:1857, 1858 for leech removal, III:1971 lung diseases from, III:2050 salicylic (See Salicylic acids) Acinar cell carcinoma, IV:2474 Acinetobacter, I:150 Acne, I:24–27, 25, I:226 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 bio-oxidative therapies for, IV:2451 drugs for, I:226–229 from hormone contraceptives, II:912 keloids from, III:1903 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 photosensitivity from, IV:2590 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 vs. rosacea, IV:2916–2919 sebaceous glands, I:13 skin lesions from, IV:3074 skin resurfacing for, IV:3079 from testosterone replacement therapy, III:2162 tetracyclines for, V:3266 Acne conglobata, I:26 Acne fulminans, I:26 Acne medications. See Antiacne agents Acne rosacea. See Rosacea Acne vulgaris. See Acne Aconite. See Monkshood Aconitum napellus. See Monkshood Acorus, for cocaine withdrawal, II:833 Acoustic nerve, II:1248 Acoustic neuroma, I:27–31 dizziness from, II:1095 hearing loss from, III:1528 Acquired hemangiomas. See Cherry angiomas; Spider angiomas Acquired immunodeficiency diseases, III:1785–1787 See also AIDS 3628 Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. See AIDS Acquired myopia. See Myopia Acral lentiginous melanoma, III:2095 Acrocephalosyndactylia, IV:2661 Acrocyanosis, I:31–32, I:331 Acrodermatitis continua, IV:2756 Acromegaly, I:32–34 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 growth hormone tests for, III:1488, 1490 peripheral neuropathy with, IV:2552 skull x-rays for, IV:3083 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3312 Acrylamide. peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2549, 2552 Acrylic, for eyeglass lenses, II:1266 Acrylic polymer, in bone cement, III:1891 ACS. See American Cancer Society ACTH. See Corticotropin ACTH-producing tumors, II:937, 938 Acthar. See Corticotropin Actifed. See Pseudoephedrine Actin, III:2260 Actinic keratosis cryotherapy for, II:962 skin resurfacing for, IV:3079 Actinomyces israelii, I:34–35 Actinomycetes, III:1717 Actinomycosis, I:34–35 Action potentials, motor, II:1160 Action Program for the Elimination of Leprosy (WHO), III:1979 Activase. See Tissue plasminogen activator Activated charcoal, II:730–732 for drug overdose, II:1106 with gastric lavage, IV:3169 with ipecac, III:1858, 1859 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 for nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337–2338 for poisoning, IV:2645 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 Active assists range of motion exercises. See Range of motion exercises Active compression-decompression resuscitation. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Active partial thromboplastin time. See Partial thromboplastin time Active range of motion exercises. See Range of motion exercises Activities of daily living ambulatory electrocardiography during, III:1654 cardiac rehabilitation for, II:659–660 with cataracts, II:671 with colostomy, II:863 in dementia, II:1024 joint replacement and, III:1890 with lung transplantation, III:2056 with mental retardation, III:2175 in multiple sclerosis, III:2253 in muscular dystrophy, III:2263–2264, 2266 spinal cord injuries and, IV:3131 Acu-Yoga. See Acupressure Acupoints. See Acupuncture points Acupressure, I:35–38, 36, 37 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for bedwetting, I:455 for canker sores, II:648 for chronic bronchitis, II:811 colonic irrigation and, II:855 for constipation, II:907 for COPD, II:811 for emphysema, II:811 for genital herpes, III:1443 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for headache, III:1524 for heartburn, III:1555 for heel spurs, III:1563 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for herniated disk, III:1630 for influenza, III:1835 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for kidney stones, III:1918 massage and, III:2126 for menopause, III:2163 for motion sickness, III:2219 for mumps, III:2256 for nausea, IV:2326 for pain, IV:2460, 2463 for PID, IV:2523 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for scoliosis, IV:2973 for seizures, IV:2989 for shingles, IV:3032 for tennis elbow, V:3253 with therapeutic touch, V:3283 for toothache, V:3337 for weight loss, IV:2377 See also Acupuncture Acupressure massage. See Acupressure Acupressure points. See Acupuncture points Acupril. See Quinapril Acupuncture, I:39–43,40, 41f, V:3360 for acute stress disorder, I:49 for adrenal gland cancer, I:60 for AIDS, I:81 for alcoholism, I:98 for anal cancer, I:171 for anemia, I:184 for anesthesia, I:36–37 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 for anxiety disorders, I:324 for arrhythmias, I:354 for bursitis, I:621 for cancer, II:636 for cervical disk disease, II:719 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for shingles, IV:3032 for sinusitis, IV:3059 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for smoke inhalation, IV:3103 for smoking cessation, IV:3107, 3109, 3210 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for stenosing tenosynovitis, V:3392 for stress, IV:3186 for stress reduction, IV:3189 for substance abuse, IV:3210–3211 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for tendinitis, V:3251 for tennis elbow, V:3253 for tension headache, V:3255 for tinnitus, V:3323 for toothache, V:3337 for urethritis, V:3441 for weight loss, IV:2377 for withdrawal, I:52 in women’s reproductive health, V:3577 See also Acupressure; Chinese traditional medicine Acupuncture points, I:41 in acupressure, I:36, I:38 applied kinesiology and, III:1924 chi and, I:43 hyperemesis gravidarum and, III:1703 menopause and, III:2163 traditional Chinese medicine and, V:3360 Acute chemical poisoning. See Poisoning Acute chest syndrome, IV:3043–3044 Acute erythroblastic leukemia, III:1985 Acute glomerulonephritis. See Glomerulonephritis Acute hemorrhagic conjunctivitis, II:1212 Acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis, IV:2720 Acute incontinence. See Urinary incontinence Acute intermittent porphyria, IV:2671, 2673, 2675 Acute kidney failure, I:43–46 from alcoholic myopathy, I:94 dialysis for, II:1058 kidney biopsy for, III:1908 from nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337, 2338 Acute leukemia, III:1986–1990, 1987, 1988 See also Acute lymphocytic leukemia; Acute myelocytic leukemia GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Acute lymphangitis, I:46–48, II:684 Acute lymphoblastic leukemia. See Acute lymphocytic leukemia Acute lymphocytic leukemia, III:1986–1989 laboratory tests for, III:1985 from myelofibrosis, III:2283 Acute mesenteric lymphadenitis, I:57 Acute mountain sickness, I:132–134 wilderness medicine for, V:3562 Acute myeloblastic leukemia. See Acute myelocytic leukemia Acute myelocytic leukemia, III:1986–1989 with Hodgkin’s disease, III:1648–1649 laboratory tests for, III:1985 Acute myelogenous leukemia. See Acute myelocytic leukemia Acute myeloid leukemia, III:1986–1989 Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis, IV:2545–2546, 2548 Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia, III:1986–1989 Acute pancreatitis. See Pancreatitis Acute pharyngoconjunctival fever, I:56 Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis, I:48–49, III:1461, IV:2333 Acute prescribing homeopathy, III:1656–1659 Acute pyelonephritis, IV:2333–2334 Acute respiratory disease. See Respiratory tract diseases Acute respiratory distress syndrome. See Adult respiratory distress syndrome Acute retroviral syndrome, I:76 Acute rheumatic fever. See Rheumatic fever Acute stress disorder, I:49–50, I:323 central nervous system depressants for, II:688 dissociative disorders with, II:1085 Acute stress gastritis. See Gastritis Acute thyroiditis, V:3319, 3320 Acute tubular necrosis, V:3445 Acutrim. See Appetite suppressants Acyclovir for chickenpox, II:751 for cold sores, II:845 for cross infection, III:1675 for encephalitis, II:1179 for facial paralysis, I:463 for genital herpes, III:1442, 1443, IV:2542 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for meningitis, III:2156 for pneumonia, IV:2640 for proctitis, IV:2719 for shingles, IV:3032 3629 Acyclovir for chronic bronchitis, II:811 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for cluster headache, II:825 for cocaine addiction, II:833, IV:3210 for COPD, II:811 for costochondritis, II:940 for cystitis, II:994 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for diabetic foot, II:1054 for dizziness, II:1096 for dysmenorrhea, II:1118, III:2172 for dyspnea, IV:3037 for E. coli infections, II:1237 for emphysema, II:811 for endometriosis, II:1194 for facial paralysis, I:463 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for frostbite, II:1372 for gallstones, III:1390 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 for headache, III:1524 for heartburn, III:1555 for heel spurs, III:1563 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for hypoglycemia, III:1736 for influenza, III:1835 for insomnia, III:1845, IV:3092 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for kidney stones, III:1918 for low back pain, III:2033 for mallet finger, III:2102 for menopause, III:2163 for mood disorders, III:2217 for motion sickness, III:2219 for movement disorders, III:2224 for osteoarthritis, IV:2999 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for pain, IV:2460, 2463 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2476 for papilledema, IV:2488 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for Parkinson disease, IV:2503 for PCOS, IV:2656 for PID, IV:2523 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for polymyositis, IV:2667–2668 for porphyria, IV:2675 for post-concussion syndrome, IV:2679 for prostatitis, IV:2741 for psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 for sciatica, IV:2965 for scoliosis, IV:2973 for seizures, IV:2989 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 Acyclovir for viral infections, I:315, 316 AD. See Alzheimer’s disease ADA deficiency, IV:3009 gene therapy for, III:1420 Adalat. See Nifedipine Adam’s apple, III:1950 Adapalene, for acne, I:25 Adaptation reaction, III:1425 Adapted linear accelerator radiosurgery. See Radiosurgery Adaptive aids. See Assistive technology devices Adaptogens, Korean ginseng and, III:1455 ADB. See Antideoxyribonuclease-B titer ADCs. See Alzheimer’s Disease Research Centers ADD. See Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Addams, Jane, IV:2387 Adder’s mouth. See Chickweed Addiction, I:50–53, 51 to alcohol (See Alcoholism) to benzodiazepines, I:466 to central nervous system depressants, II:689 to cocaine, II:831–834 to diazepam, III:2259 with dissociative identity disorder, III:2245 to drugs (See Substance abuse) to eating (See Eating disorders) to gambling (See Process addictions) high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 Holtzman inkblot test for, III:1655 meditation for, III:2148 in men, III:2168 to narcotics, I:174, 175 with opioid analgesics, I:175 to smoking (See Smoking) substance dependence and, IV:3206 withdrawal and (See Substance withdrawal syndrome) See also Drug abuse Addiction recovery program. See Substance withdrawal syndrome Addictive personality, I:51 Addisonian crisis, I:54, 65 from glucocorticoids, II:936 hypotension from, III:1752 Addison’s disease, I:53–54 corticotropin test for, I:64–65 cortisol test for, II:937 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154, 1155 hyperkalemia from, III:1705 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 hyponatremia from, III:1743 hypoparathyroidism from, III:1744 with opioid analgesics, I:177 3630 plasma renin activity for, IV:2618 vitiligo with, IV:3078 Adenectomy for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 Adenocarcinoma, II:632 anal cancer from, I:170 from DES, II:1039, 1040 endometrial, II:1188 esophageal, II:1239, 1240 lung, III:2043 pancreatic, IV:2471, 2473–2474 See also Cancer Adenoid hyperplasia, I:55–56 Adenoidectomy, V:3325–3326 for adenoid hyperplasia, I:55 velopharyngeal insufficiency from, V:3489 Adenoids, enlarged bedwetting from, I:455 malocclusion from, III:2106 T & A for, V:3325 Adenolymphoma parotid cancer from, IV:2504 salivary gland scan for, IV:2932 Adenoma adrenocortical (See Adrenocortical adenoma) bile duct, III:2019 hyperparathyroidism from, III:1713 pituitary (See Pituitary adenoma) from toxic thyroid, V:3310 Adenomyosis. See Endometriosis Adenosine for coronary angiography, II:930 for paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, IV:2505 Adenosine deaminase deficiency. See ADA deficiency Adenosis, II:1040, 1323 Adenoviridae infections, I:56–58, IV:3118 Adenovirus infections. See Adenoviridae infections Adenoviruses, I:56–57 conjunctivitis from, II:903 corneal ulcers from, II:922 gastroenteritis from, III:1408 as gene vectors, III:1420 hemorrhagic cystitis from, II:992 with keratitis, III:1905 myocarditis from, III:2289 pericarditis from, IV:2538 ADH. See Atypical ductal hyperplasia ADH deficiency. See Vasopressin deficiency ADH test. See Antidiuretic hormone test ADHD. See Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Adhesions from appendectomy, I:340 Adhesive capsulitis, I:366 Adipocytes, I:355 Adipose tissue burns of, I:617 in gynecomastia, III:1497 lack of amenorrhea from, I:147 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2389 with lipoproteins, III:2007 repair of injuries to, III:1936 for skin grafts, IV:3070 surgical removal of, III:2009–2011 Adipost. See Phendimetrazine ADIS. See Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule Adjustment disorders, I:58–59 depression and, II:1033 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 from PTSD, IV:2686 Adjuvant chemotherapy for bladder cancer, I:508 for cancer, II:636, 740 for endometrial cancer, II:1190–1191 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 with lumpectomy, III:2036 with mastectomy, III:2130 for melanoma, III:2098 for neuroblastoma, IV:2341–2342 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2476 See also Chemotherapy Adjuvant radiotherapy with mastectomy, III:2130 for parotidectomy, IV:2504 ADLs. See Activities of daily living Adolescent scoliosis. See Scoliosis Adolescents addiction and, I:50–51 anorexia nervosa and, I:211 chondromalacia patellae in, II:795, 796 drowning and near drowning of, IV:2326–2328 fluoroquinolones and, II:1345 gynecomastia in, III:1497 MMPI-2 for, III:2198 as rape victims, IV:2817 scoliosis in, IV:2970–2973 self mutilation in, IV:2993–2994 STDs in, III:1416, 1472 substance abuse in, IV:3211 Adopted children studies, IV:2959 Adrenal adenoma, I:62 Adrenal calcification, III:2005 Adrenal carcinoma. See Adrenal gland cancer Adrenal cortex in Addison’s disease, I:53–54 in adrenal cancer, I:59–60 aldosterone and, I:101 Adrenal cortex hormones. See Corticosteroids Adrenal crisis, II:885 Adrenal failure GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Adrenaline. See Epinephrine Adrenergic agents diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 heartburn from, III:1554 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 Adrenergic alpha-antagonists. See Alpha1-adrenergic blockers Adrenergic antagonists, III:1722, 1723 Adrenergic alpha-antagonists for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 gastric acid determination and, III:1400 for hypertension, III:1723 for prostatitis, IV:2741 Adrenergic beta-antagonists. See Beta blockers Adrenoceptor stimulants, I:120 Adrenocortical adenoma, III:1694 Adrenocortical carcinoma, I:60 Adrenocorticoids. See Corticosteroids Adrenocorticotropic hormone. See Corticotropin Adrenogenital syndrome. See Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66–67 neonatal, IV:2560 x-linked, IV:2560–2562 Adrenomyeloneuropathy. See Adrenoleukodystrophy Adriamycin. See Doxorubicin AdRP, IV:2880–2881 Adrucil. See 5-fluorouracil Adson’s test, V:3287 Adsorbents, for diarrhea, I:264 Adult acne. See Rosacea Adult celiac disease. See Celiac disease Adult daycare, I:139 Adult-onset asthma. See Asthma Adult-onset diabetes mellitus. See Diabetes mellitus Adult periodontitis, IV:2546 Adult respiratory distress syndrome, I:67–69 anxiety from, I:318 cyanosis from, II:979 inhalation therapies for, III:1837, 1838 from pleurisy, IV:2631 vs. pulmonary edema, IV:2778 Adult scoliosis. See Scoliosis Advance Directives, III:2000 Advanced Breast Biopsy Instrument, II:1324 Advanced cardiac life support, IV:3212 Advil. See Ibuprofen; ibuprofen Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, V:3265 AEB. See Atrial ectopic beats Aedes, II:1166 Aedes aegypti, II:1027, V:3590 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Aerobic bacteria aminoglycosides for, I:150–151 blood culture for, I:522–523 cultures for, V:3578 lung abscess from, III:2038 Aerobic exercises for atherosclerosis, I:397 for endometriosis prevention, II:1194 for heart attack prevention, III:1535 Aerobics. See Aerobic exercises AeroBid. See Flunisolide Aerosol lung scan. See Lung ventilation scan Aerosol treatments, for emphysema, II:1174 Aerospace medicine. See Aviation medicine AFA. See Aphanizomenon flos-aquae AFCD, for arrhythmia, II:1165 Affective disorders. See Mood disorders Afferent loop syndrome, III:1399 Affinity anoxia, I:216 Aflatoxin, liver cancer from, III:2019, 2022 African endemic Kaposi’s sarcoma. See Kaposi’s sarcoma African sleeping sickness. See African trypanosomiasis African trypanosomiasis, I:298 Afrin. See Oxymetazoline Agammaglobulinemia, III:1391 AGE. See Gas embolism Age-onset diabetes. See Noninsulindependent diabetes mellitus Age-related illnesses. See specific disorders Age-related macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration Age-related maculopathy. See Macular degeneration Age spots, IV:3077, 3078 Aged macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, I:457 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry, III:1965 Ageusia with anosmia, I:215, IV:3098, 3099, 3100 from brachytherapy, IV:2815 with dry mouth, II:1109 from mastoidectomy, III:2133 Aggrastat. See Tirofiban Aggression bruxism from, I:608 in conduct disorder, II:882, 883, 884 from dementia, II:1025 with intermittent explosive disorder, III:1845–1846 3631 Aggression hypotension from, III:1752 from polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 Adrenal gland cancer, I:59–60 adrenalectomy for, I:63 catecholamines in, II:677 with familial polyposis, II:1285 hirsutism from, III:1637 hyperaldosteronism from, III:1694, 1695 from kidney cancer, III:1910 neuroblastomas, IV:2340–2342 Adrenal gland diseases cortisol test for, II:937 dehydration from, II:1017 hirsutism from, III:1637 from histoplasmosis, III:1640 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 hypokalemia from, II:1158 hyponatremia from, III:1743 in polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 precocious puberty from, IV:2691 thyroid hormones and, V:3313 Adrenal gland scan, I:60–61 Adrenal gland tumors adrenal virilism from, I:62 adrenalectomy for, I:63 aldosteronism from, I:101 Cushing’s syndrome from, I:60, 65 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 pheochromocytoma, IV:2577–2579 sex hormone tests for, IV:3013 Adrenal glands, I:61–62 aldosterone and, I:100 CAT scan of, II:875 catecholamines from, II:677 with corticotropin test, I:64–65 disorders of electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 in dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112, 1113 enlarged, Cushing’s syndrome from, I:65 in nephrectomy, IV:2332 in puberty, IV:2772, 2773 removal of (See Adrenalectomy) Adrenal hyperplasia adrenal virilism from, I:62 congenital (See Congenital adrenal hyperplasia) hyperaldosteronism from, III:1695 Adrenal medulla cancer of, I:59–60 pheochromocytoma in, IV:2577–2578 scan of, I:60 Adrenal steroids. See Corticosteroids Adrenal virilism, I:61–62 Adrenalectomy, I:60, I:63–64, II:886, III:1695 Aggression maxillofacial trauma from, III:2136 in oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2396 Aging, I:69–73 atherosclerosis from, I:393 benign prostatic hypertrophy from, II:1201 bruises and, I:607 with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 cervical disk disease from, II:718 with coronary heart disease, II:929 dehydration and, II:1016 with Down syndrome, II:1100 dry mouth from, II:1109 ectropion and entropion with, II:1271 exercise for, II:1249 face lift for, II:1275 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 fractures from, II:1363 hearing disorders from, II:838 with hemophilus infections, III:1586 with hypothermia, III:1754 vs. hypothyroidism, III:1756 itching from, III:1875 macular degeneration from, III:2075–2077 malnutrition from, III:2104 mammography and, III:2110 menopause and, III:2159 premature (See Premature aging) senior’s health and, IV:2996–3001 smelling disorders from, IV:3099, 3100 from sun exposure, IV:2589 theories of, I:70 Aging Body, Timeless Mind, I:429 Agoraphobia, I:72–73, I:322, IV:2581–2583 anxiety with, I:319 caffeine with, II:626 cognitive therapy for, II:840 with panic disorder, IV:2482 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 with somatoform disorders, IV:3116 Agranulocytosis. See Neutropenia Agrimony, for menorrhagia, III:2172 Ahimsa, V:3484–3485 AHMA. See American Holistic Medicine Association AIDS, I:73–81, 75, 77f, IV:3021 acupuncture and, I:40 with animal bite infections, I:207 antibiotic prophylaxis for, IV:2726 antiretroviral drugs for, I:303–304 with aspirin, I:378 autoimmunity, I:76 autopsy for, I:425 bacillary angiomatosis and, I:434 with blastomycosis, I:513 blood transfusions and, V:3367, 3369 brain abscess and, I:566 3632 with breastfeeding, III:1943 with bronchiectasis, I:596 bruises from, I:608 Campylobacter and, II:630 with cat-scratch disease, II:670 cell therapy for, II:686 with cellulitis, II:684 with cerebral toxoplasmosis, V:3349 cervical cancer from, II:716 with chancroid, II:729 in children, I:74, 75, 80, 86 with cholangitis, II:774 with coccidioidomycosis, II:834 with cryptococcosis, II:964 cryptosporidiosis and, II:967 with cyclosporiasis, II:981 with cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 defined, I:73 with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 dementia from, II:1024 demographics, I:73–74 diagnosis of, I:78–80 diarrhea from, II:1066 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 with enterobacterial infections, II:1204 with erysipelas, II:1225 ethnic differences in, III:2200, 2201 eyelid tumors from, II:1272 with fifth disease, II:1328 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 gene therapy for, III:1421–1422 with giardiasis, III:1451 granuloma inguinale with, III:1483 with Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 with hepatitis B, III:1601 with histoplasmosis, III:1639–1641 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 immunotherapy for, III:1791 infection control and, III:1822 with infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 with interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 with IUDs, III:1876 Kaposi’s sarcoma and, III:1897 with laryngitis, III:1957 with Legionnaires’ disease, III:1972 with leishmaniasis, III:1975 with listeriosis, III:2012 lung abscess from, III:2039 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 with lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071 with melioidosis, III:2150 with meningitis, III:2154 with mucormycosis, III:2232 with mycobacterial infections, III:2276–2277 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 with nocardiosis, IV:2358 with non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, III:2092, 2094 periodontitis from, IV:2547 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2635, 2636 with pneumonia, IV:2638 prevention, I:81 proctitis with, IV:2718 prognosis, I:81 with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2743 reverse transcriptase inhibitors for, IV:2359 risk factors, I:74 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2935 with septic shock, IV:3005 shigellosis and, IV:3029 shingles and, IV:3032 sporotrichosis and, IV:3143 St. John’s wort for, IV:3152 stages of, I:76–78 with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, IV:3160 stomatitis with, IV:3170 from substance abuse, IV:3208 TB tests and, V:3404 testicular cancer and, V:3257 tests for, I:79–80, 82–87 toxic epidermal necrolysis with, V:3346 with toxoplasmosis, V:3349 transverse myelitis from, V:3375 treatment for, I:80–81 with trichomoniasis, V:3540 tuberculosis and, I:310 tuberculosis from, V:3405, 3406, 3407 with vibriosis, V:3506 warts and, V:3548 WBC count and differential for, V:3556 in women, I:74, 78, 80, V:3576, 3577 See also AIDS-related cancers; HIV AIDS dementia complex, I:77, II:1087, III:2246 AIDS-related cancers, I:78, 80 See also Kaposi’s sarcoma AIDS-related Kaposi’s sarcoma. See Kaposi’s sarcoma AIDS serology tests. See AIDS tests AIDS tests, I:79–80, I:82–87, 83, III:2201 Aikido for anxiety, I:321 for anxiety disorders, I:324 for stress, IV:3186 AIP. See Acute intermittent porphyria Air contrast enema. See Barium enema GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for bedwetting, I:455 for sleep apnea, II:773 Albendazole for cutaneous larvae migrans, II:975 for echinococcosis, II:1128 for filariasis, II:1331 for fluke infection, II:1344 for parasitic disease, I:273 for roundworm infections, IV:2924 for strongyloidiasis, V:3292 for tapeworms, V:3241 Albenza. See Albendazole Albers-Schoenberg disease. See Osteopetrosis Albert Einstein Medical Center, II:832 Albinism, I:88–91, 90, IV:3077, 3078 nystagmus from, IV:2372 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 Albumin ascites and, I:371–372 in diabetes mellitus, II:1050 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 in nephritis, IV:2334 protein components test and, IV:2745–2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747–2748 in sex hormone tests, IV:3013 transfusions of, I:132 Albuterol for asthma, I:120, 381 as bronchodilators, I:601 with dicyclomine, I:309 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for RSV, IV:2869 Alcohol (Antiseptic), I:307 Alcohol (Beverage). See Alcoholic beverages Alcohol abuse. See Alcoholism Alcohol dehydrogenase, IV:2574 Alcohol dependence. See Alcoholism Alcohol-induced hepatitis, I:374 Alcohol metabolism, I:95, 96, 97 Alcohol poisoning amylase tests for, I:160 vs. CO poisoning, II:652 Alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:91–95 Alcohol use disorders. See Alcoholism Alcohol withdrawal delirium, I:91, 92, 93, 97–98, II:1021, 1022, V:3572, 3573 benzodiazepines for, I:466 vs. generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 hallucinations from, III:1504 tremors from, V:3381 Alcoholic beverages abuse of (See Alcoholism) with acetaminophen, I:19 addiction to (See Alcoholism) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 aging and, I:72 amenorrhea and, III:2172 with anti-insomnia agents, I:283 with antiangina agents, I:231 with antiarrhythmics, I:234 with anticoagulants, I:251 with anticonvulsants, I:253 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with antifungal drugs, I:268 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 with antirheumatic drugs, I:306 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 arrhythmias from, I:353 with atherosclerosis, I:397 with barbiturates, I:445 with benzodiazepines, I:467 birth defects from, I:490 with blepharoplasty, I:518, 519 with caffeine, II:625 with cephalosporins, II:693 with cisapride, I:272 cluster headache from, II:824 CNS depression and, II:689, 1102–1103 with cold sores, II:845 congenital brain defects from, II:891 congenital heart diseases from, II:900 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 with coronary heart disease, II:933 decompression sickness and, II:1009 delirium from, II:1021, 1022 with diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 diarrhea from, II:1066 with diuretics, II:1089 dizziness from, II:1095 in drowning, IV:2326, 2328 dry mouth from, II:1109 dyspepsia from, II:1118 with EGD, II:1246 with esophageal atresia, II:1238 with female sexual arousal disorder, II:1309 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 folic acid deficiency anemia and, II:1349 with food poisoning, II:1355 frostbite and, II:1370 gamma-glutamyl transferase levels from, III:2025, 2027 gas embolism from, II:1170 gastric acid determination and, III:1400 gastroenteritis and, III:1409 gout from, III:1476, 1478 head and neck cancer from, III:1516, 1519 headache from, III:1523 in healthy diets, III:2104 for heart attack prevention, III:1536 in heart failure, III:1540 3633 Alcoholic beverages Air embolism. See Gas embolism Air pollution asthma from, I:380 COPD and, II:809 extrinsic allergic alveolitis from, III:1717 heavy metal poisoning from, III:1560 indoor. multiple chemical sensitivity from, III:2235 lung cancer from, III:2044, 2047 lung diseases from, III:1773, 1774, 1775, 2050 multiple chemical sensitivity from, III:2235 perforated septum from, IV:2535 pulmonary eosinophilia from, II:1216 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2867 sore throat from, IV:3118 vocal cord nodules and polyps from, V:3529 Airborne precautions. See Universal precautions Airport malaria. See Malaria Airsickness. See Motion sickness Airway obstruction from ABPA, I:108 from anaphylaxis, I:179 bronchiectasis from, I:596 choking from, II:772–773 from epiglottitis, II:1220 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1564–1566 hemoptysis from, III:1589 from hives, III:1642 from hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 with laryngitis, III:1957, 1958 leeches in, III:1971 life support for, III:1999 from nasal trauma, IV:2317 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2865 from sedation, IV:2984 septoplasty for, IV:3006 with stridor, IV:3193 T & A for, V:3325 AIT. See Auditory integration training Akathisia. See Restless legs syndrome Akineton. See Biperiden ALA dehydrogenase deficiency porphyria, IV:2671 Alanine aminotransferase in cholestasis, II:785 for hepatitis C diagnosis, III:1604 liver function tests for, I:87–88, III:2024–2027 with Tacrine, I:138 Alarcon, lead poisoning from, III:1965 Alarm reaction. See Fight or flight response Alarms Alcoholic beverages heartburn from, III:1553 with hepatitis A, III:1597 with hepatitis B, III:1601 with hepatitis C, III:1604 with hepatitis D, III:1606 hiccups from, III:1631 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 hives from, III:1643 with hydroxyzine, I:285 hyperhidrosis from, III:1704 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1708 hypertension and, III:1721 hypogonadism from, III:1738 with hypothermia, III:1754 indigestion and, III:1813, 1815 in infertility, III:1833 with interferons, III:1793 intoxication, vs. inert gas narcosis, IV:2356 with isotretinoin, I:227 jaundice from, IV:2330 lactate dehydrogenase levels and, III:1939 lactic acidosis from, III:1945 laryngeal cancer and, III:1950–1951 with lipoprotein test, III:2008 with liver function tests, III:2024–2025 with lung transplantation, III:2054 with macular degeneration, III:2076 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 mastocytosis from, III:2132 men and, III:2165 with Meniere’s disease, III:2152 mental retardation from maternal use, III:2174, 2176 with methadone, III:2181 with metronidazole, I:298 as migraine trigger, III:2187 with mood disorders, III:2217 in motion sickness, III:2218 nausea from, IV:2325 night terrors from, IV:2355, 2356 nystagmus from, IV:2372 with opioid analgesics, I:177 osteoporosis from, IV:2428 with paresthesia, IV:2365 with periodic paralysis, IV:2544 phenytoin and, IV:2577 platelet aggregation test and, IV:2623 after portal vein bypass, IV:2676 pregnancy and, IV:2697, 2712 premature labor from, IV:2701 prematurity and, IV:2708 with prochlorperazine, I:293 psychosis from, IV:2766 recurrent miscarriages and, IV:2836 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 restless legs syndrome prevention and, IV:2872 rosacea and, IV:2918 with sedatives, IV:2983 3634 in semen analysis, IV:2995 with sick sinus syndrome, IV:3040 sideroblastic anemia from, IV:3048 sleep disorders from, IV:3089 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 sore throat from, IV:3118 stool fats and, IV:3173 stroke from, IV:3198 substance abuse and, IV:3206, 3208, 3211 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:259 uric acid and, III:1479 with ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 withdrawal from (See Alcohol withdrawal delirium) with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 Alcoholic cerebellar degeneration, I:91, 92, 94 Alcoholic hepatitis, III:1597–1598 Alcoholic liver diseases with antituberculosis drugs, I:311 bleeding from, V:3399 bleeding varices from, I:516, 517 liver function tests for, I:88 neurologic complications from, I:91, 92–94 Alcoholic myoglobinuria. See Alcoholic myopathy Alcoholic myopathy, I:91, 92–94 Alcoholic neuropathy, I:91, 93, 94, IV:2549, 2552, 2553 Alcoholic peripheral neuropathy. See Alcoholic neuropathy Alcoholic rhabdomyolysis. See Alcoholic myopathy Alcoholic rose gardener’s disease. See Sporotrichosis Alcoholics Anonymous, I:52, 98, IV:3211 vs. group therapy, III:1485 for impulse control disorders, III:1808 after liver transplantation, III:2030 Alcoholism, I:50, 52, I:95–99, 97t, II:689 abdominal fluid from, IV:2489 acidosis from, III:2179 acupuncture for, I:39 with anti-insomnia agents, I:284 with anticancer agents, I:248 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311 anxiety disorders and, I:324 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 bacteremia and, I:435 with barbiturates, I:446 battered child syndrome and, I:452, 453 with benzodiazepines, I:467 beriberi from, I:469 bleeding varices and, I:516, 517 brain tumors from, I:574 breast cancer from, I:578 bruises from, I:608 cancer and, II:632, 637 carbuncle with, I:536 cataracts from, II:673 choking from, II:772 cholestasis from, II:785 cleft lip and palate from, II:819 color blindness from, II:860 in conduct disorder, II:883 dementia from, II:1025 diabetes from, II:1046, 1049 with dissociative identity disorder, III:2245 electroencephalography for, II:1151 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 esophageal cancer and, II:1240 fatty liver from, II:1298 fetal alcohol syndrome and, II:1309–1312 fracture repair and, II:1361 furunculosis with, I:536 gallstones from, III:1388 gas embolism and, III:1397 with gastrostomy, III:1411 in gays and lesbians, III:1415, 1416 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 heart failure from, III:1538 with heart transplantation, III:1545 with hemophilus infections, III:1586 with hemoptysis, III:1589 high cholesterol and, II:786 hyperphosphatemia from, IV:2585 hypocalcemia from, III:1731 hypokalemia from, III:1740 hypothermia from, III:1753 impotence from, III:1805 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 insomnia from, III:1845 Korsakoff’s syndrome from, III:1930–1931 liver cancer from, III:2019, 2022 liver cirrhosis from, II:815, 817, 818 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 liver function tests for, III:2025 liver transplantation and, III:2028, 2029, 2030 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 with malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 Mallory-Weiss syndrome from, III:2102–2103 malnutrition from, III:2104 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 meningitis from, III:2154 mental retardation from, III:2174 methadone and, III:2182 mineral deficiencies from, III:2191 neurologic diseases from, I:91–95 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with opioid analgesics, I:177 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for Paget’s disease, I:542, IV:2456 Aleppo boil. See Cutaneous leishmaniasis Aletrius farinosa, III:1806 Aleukemic megakaryocytic myelosis. See Myelofibrosis Aleve. See Naproxen Alexander, Charles, III:2146 Alexander, Frederick Matthias, I:103, 104 Alexander, Hattie, III:2155 Alexander technique, I:103–106, III:2226, 2227 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for sciatica, IV:2965 for stress reduction, IV:3189 Alexandrian senna. See Senna Alfalfa for atherosclerosis, I:396 for bruises, I:608 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 for PMS, IV:2711 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3234 Alfentanil, for general anesthesia, I:187 Alginic acid, I:217–218 Alglucerase, for Gaucher’s disease, III:2005 Alitretinoin, for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 Alka-Seltzer. See Aspirin-sodium bicarbonate Alkali imbalance. See Acid-base imbalance Alkalies ipecac and, III:1857, 1858 Alkalies, with gastric lavage, IV:3169 Alkaline phosphatase in cholestasis, II:785 liver function tests for, III:2025 in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 test for, I:106–107 Alkaline reflux gastritis, V:3428 Alkalization, of the blood, III:1740 Alkalosis from carbon dioxide, II:1159 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 from phosphorus imbalance, IV:2585 urinalysis for, V:3445 Alkaptonuria, V:3445 Alkeran. See Melphalan Alkohl, lead poisoning from, III:1965 Alkylamines, I:277 Alkylating agents, for leukemia, I:102 Alkylating drugs, II:740 ALL. See Acute lymphocytic leukemia All-heal. See Valerian Allegra. See Fexofenadine GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Allen Brown criteria, IV:2824 Allen test, for thoracic outlet syndrome, V:3287 Allergen-specific IgE tests, I:117–118 Allergens, I:115, 116, 117, 118, I:119, I:121, 122 asthma from, I:380 vs. autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 contact dermatitis and, II:909 hives from, III:1642 serum sickness from, IV:3008 tests for, I:122–125 wheezing from, V:3554 Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, I:107–109, I:375 Allergic conjunctivitis. See Conjunctivitis Allergic contact dermatitis. See Contact dermatitis Allergic fungal sinusitis. See Sinusitis Allergic purpura, I:109–111, V:3479, 3480 Allergic reactions. See Allergy Allergic rhinitis, I:111–114, 112, I:115–116, 118, 121, 122 anosmia from, IV:3099 with asthma, I:380 with atopic dermatitis, I:403 deviated septum and, II:1045 nasal polyps from, IV:2315, 2316 seasonal (See Hay fever) Allergies, I:114–122, 117f, 119f with abacavir, I:304 to ACE inhibitors, I:204 with angiography, I:200 with anti-insomnia agents, I:283 with anticoagulants, I:251 with anticonvulsants, I:254 with antihelminthic drugs, I:275 antihistamines for, I:276–278 with antimigraine agents, I:290 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311 asthma from, I:236, 237, 380 astigmatism from, I:385 atopic dermatitis, I:403, 404 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:302 vs. autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 with azithromycin, I:242 balanitis from, I:439–440 berylliosis, I:472 with beta blockers, I:475 to bites and stings, I:498, 499, 501, 503 blood transfusions and, V:3369 with breastfeeding, III:1942 bronchodilators and, I:601 caffeine and, II:626 with calcium channel blockers, II:627 vs. carbohydrate intolerance, II:650 carbuncle with, I:536 3635 Allergies in oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2396–2397 pancreatitis from, IV:2469, 2478, 2481 paraphilias with, IV:3018 paresthesia from, IV:2365 pellagra from, IV:2515 physical restraints for, IV:2760 placental abruption from, IV:2612 protein components test for, IV:2746 in rape victims, IV:2818 riboflavin deficiency from, IV:2906 salivary gland tumors from, IV:2933–2934 scurvy from, IV:2978 seizures from, IV:2986 self help groups for, III:1485 spinal cord injuries from, IV:3128 sporotrichosis and, IV:3143 stillbirth from, IV:3163 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3202 substance abuse and, IV:3206, 3208 sudden infant death syndrome from, IV:3213–3215 with sulfonamides, IV:3217 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:268 tracheotomy and, V:3355 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 tuberculosis from, V:3406 uric acid tests and, V:3442 with vagotomy, V:3470 vitamin A deficiency from, V:3512 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 in women, V:3576, 3577 Aldactazide. See Spironolactone Aldactone. See Spironolactone Alder buckthorn. See Buckthorn Alder dogwood. See Buckthorn Aldesleukin in immunotherapy, III:1791, 1792 for melanoma, III:2099 Aldolase B in fructose intolerance, III:1621 Aldolase test, I:99–100 Aldomet. See Methyldopa Aldosterone in Addison’s disease, I:53 with congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:884 with corticotropin, I:64 in hyperkalemia, III:1705 in hyponatremia, III:1743 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 test for, I:100–101 Aldosteronism. See Hyperaldosteronism Aldrich, R. A., V:3569 Alemtuxumab, I:102–103 Alendronate for osteoporosis, I:542, IV:2416 Allergies choking from, II:772 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:790 with chymopapain, II:739 circulation and, III:1999 cluster headache from, II:824 common allergens, I:116 vs. common cold, II:870 conjunctivitis from, II:903 COPD and, II:810 cough from, II:941 to decongestants, II:1011 decongestants for, II:1010–1013 defined, I:114–115 delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1019 dermatitis from, II:1037 diagnosis of, I:117–118 with dicyclomine, I:309 dizziness from, II:1095 from echinococcosis, II:1127, 1128 encephalitis from, II:1177 extrinsic allergic alveolitis as, III:1716–1718 with eyeglasses and contact lenses, II:1265 vs. fifth disease, II:1329 to fish, II:1335 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 furunculosis with, I:536 with gallbladder x-ray, III:1382 with gammaglobulin, III:1391 with general anesthetics, I:187–188 hives from, III:1642–1643 HSG and, III:1766 hypoglycemia and, III:1734 insect, I:123, 179, 180 with intravenous urography, III:1855 itching from, III:1874 Kawasaki syndrome from, III:1901 keratitis from, III:1905 to latex, II:881–882 lichen planus from, III:1997 to microfilariae, II:1167, 1168 to multiple chemicals (See Multiple chemical sensitivity) nail removal for, IV:2309 nausea with, IV:2325 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 with nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 NSAIDs and, IV:2362 with occupational asthma, IV:2386 otitis media from, IV:2435 with penicillins, IV:2528 physical, IV:2591–2592 from piercing and tattoos, IV:2599 prevention of, I:122 primary biliary cirrhosis and, IV:2717 prognosis for, I:121–122 pulmonary eosinophilia as, II:1216 pulmonary fibrosis from, IV:2782 rash from, IV:2820 3636 retrograde cystography and, IV:2892 retrograde ureteropyelography and, IV:2893 serum sickness, IV:3007–3009 shots for (See Allergy shots) sinusitis and, IV:3058 skin lesions from, IV:3074 to smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 speech disorders from, IV:3122, 3125 to spermicides, II:1064–1065 SSRIs and, IV:2991 with sulfonamides, IV:3216 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:268 tests for (See Allergy tests) thyroid hormones and, V:3313 tooth restoration and, V:3334 traction and, V:3357 treatment of, I:118–121 venography and, V:3493 vocal cord nodules and polyps from, V:3529 vulvovaginitis from, V:3539 WBC count and differential for, V:3557 wheezing from, V:3554 See also Anaphylaxis Allergy shots for allergic rhinitis, I:113 with beta blockers, I:476 Allergy tests, I:117–118, I:122–125, 123, 124 for asthma, I:381, 383 with beta blockers, I:477 detoxification and, II:1042 Allicin. See Garlic Allium cepa. See Onions Allium sativum. See Garlic Allodynia, IV:2459 Allogeneic grafts. See Allografts Allogenic bone marrow transplantation, I:550–552, 554 See also Bone marrow transplantation Allograft rejection. See Graft rejection Allografts, I:544 for acute leukemia, III:1988 vs. autografts, I:544 for burns, I:619 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for lymphomas, III:2094 for skin grafts, IV:3070 Allopathic medicine. See Allopathy Allopathy drug interactions with, II:1103 vs. osteopathy, IV:2421 Allopurinol alemtuzumab and, I:103 with azathioprine, III:1799 cholestasis from, II:784 for gout, I:282, III:1477–1478, 1479 for hyperuricemia, I:282 for kidney stones, III:1918 for leishmaniasis, III:1976 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 serum sickness from, IV:3008 for tumor lysis syndrome, I:103 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Allorhythmia. See Arrhythmia Allport, Gordon, III:1676 Allyl chloride, IV:2552 Allylamine derivatives, for fungal infections, I:270 Almond oil, for constipation, II:907 Aloe for burns, I:619, II:765 for chickenpox, II:751 for contact dermatitis, II:910 for corns and calluses, II:924 for frostbite, II:1372 for heartburn, III:1555 for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for physical allergy, IV:2592 poisoning from, IV:2643 for prickly heat, IV:2717 for sunburn, IV:3218 for warts, V:3549 Aloe bardadensis. See Aloe Aloe vera. See Aloe Alopecia, I:125–127, 125 from anticancer agents, I:246 from brachytherapy, IV:2816 from celiac disease, II:682 from chemotherapy, II:640, 742 from discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 from face lift, II:1276 hair transplantation for, III:1499 from interferons, III:1794–1795 minoxidil for, III:2202–2203 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 from polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 from selenium toxicity, III:2195 from stress, III:1425 Alopecia areata, I:125, 126, III:1795 Alopecia totalis, I:125 Alpha-1 antagonists, I:32 Alpha-1-antitrypsin, II:809 Alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency, II:1172 Alpha-2 agonists, for glaucoma, III:1459 Alpha-amanitin. See Amanitins Alpha blockers. See Alpha1-adrenergic blockers Alpha brain wave, II:1152 Alpha-fetoprotein test, I:127–128 antenatal, I:220 for birth defects, I:492 for Down syndrome, II:1100 genetic counseling and, III:1430 for liver cancer, III:2020, 2022 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for allergies, I:121 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:139–140 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:166 for angina pectoris, I:195–196 for angiomas, I:496 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 for anosmia, I:215 for anxiety, I:321 for anxiety disorders, I:323 for ascites, I:373 for athlete’s foot, I:399 for autism, I:420–421 for balanitis, I:440 for Bartholin’s gland cyst, I:450 for bites and stings, I:503 for bladder stones, I:511 for bleeding varices, I:517 for brain tumors, I:573 for cancer, II:636–637 for cervical disk disease, II:719 for chickenpox, II:751 for children’s health, II:765 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 for chronic bronchitis, II:811 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for coagulation disorders, II:829 for contact dermatitis, II:909–910 for contractures, II:914 for COPD, II:811 for cor pulmonale, II:917 for costochondritis, II:940 for cough, II:942 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for depression, II:1035 for deviated septum, II:1045 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for diverticulum, II:889 for E. coli infections, II:1237 for emphysema, II:811, 1174 endometrial cancer and, II:1191 for esophageal cancer, II:1241 for exstrophy, II:889 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for folliculitis, II:1352 for food poisoning, II:1356 for fractures, II:1365 for gallstones, III:1390 for glaucoma, III:1461 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1503 for headache, III:1524 for hearing loss, III:1530 for heartburn, III:1555 for hepatitis C, III:1604 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647–1648 for IBS, III:1867 for impotence, III:1806 for influenza, III:1835 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899–1900 for laryngeal cancer, III:1953–1954 for lead poisoning, III:1968 for liver cancer, III:2021 for lung cancer, III:2045 for Lyme disease, III:2060 for nausea, IV:2326 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for palpitations, IV:2466 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for retinal artery occlusion, IV:2875 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for rubella, IV:2927 for sarcomas, IV:2944–2945 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 for scoliosis, IV:2972–2973 for sexual dysfunctions, II:1308–1309, IV:3017 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for small cell lung cancer, III:2049 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for speech disorders, IV:3124 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for stomatitis, IV:3170 for substance abuse, IV:3210–3211 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 vegetarianism in, V:3486 Alters. See Dissociative identity disorder Althaea officianalis. See Marsh mallow Altitude sickness, I:132–134 from anoxia, I:217, 427 cocaine for, II:831 wilderness medicine for, V:3561, 3562 Altromed-S. See Clofibrate Alum for sore throats, IV:3120 for strep throat, IV:3179 Aluminum carbonate as antacid, I:218 for hyperphosphatemia, IV:2585 Aluminum chloride hexadydrate, III:1704 Aluminum hydroxide in antacids, I:218 for hyperphosphatemia, IV:2585 Aluminum salts, II:906 Alupent. See Metaproterenol Alveolar macrophages, III:1973 Alveolar proteinosis. See Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis Alveoli in ARDS, I:67 in blastomycosis, I:513 in emphysema, II:809, 1172 in extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1716 3637 Alveoli with pregnancy, IV:2697 prenatal, II:800 for stillbirth, IV:3163 Alpha-fetoproteins amniocentesis and, I:154 in ovarian cancer, V:3258 in testicular cancer, V:3258 as tumor markers, V:3412–3413 Alpha-galactosidase A, III:2003, 2005 Alpha-globulins, IV:2747–2748 Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, I:262 Alpha-glucosidases, III:1466 Alpha-hemolytic streptococci, IV:2321 Alpha-Interferon. See Interferon-alpha Alpha-L-iduronidase, III:2228, 2229 Alpha-linoleic acid for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 Alpha-mercaptopropionylglycine, II:991 Alpha polypeptide, III:1578 Alpha thalassemia, V:3270–3272, 3274–3276 Alpha1-adrenergic blockers, I:129–131, IV:2579 Alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency, II:816 Alpha2-adrenergic agonists, I:93 Alphagan, for glaucoma, III:1459 Alphavirus, I:347 Alport’s syndrome, I:131–132, II:806, IV:2333–2334 Alprazolam for anxiety, I:231–233, 466 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for central nervous system depression, II:689 with cisapride, I:273 with dicyclomine, I:309 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for phobias, I:73, IV:2583 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 with prochlorperazine, I:294 for PTSD, IV:2686 Alprostadil with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Alprostadil, for impotence, III:1806 ALS. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ALS Society, I:166 ALT. See Alanine aminotransferase Altace. See Ramipril Alteplase. See Tissue plasminogen activator Alterated states of consciousness, III:1729–1730 Alternative medicine for acne, I:26 for acute stress disorder, I:49 for addictions, I:52, II:833 for adenoid hyperplasia, I:55–56 for ADHD, I:412–413 for AIDS, I:80–81 for alcoholism, I:98 Alveoli in hookworm disease, III:1667 in interstitial lung diseases, III:1773 obstruction of, I:390 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2635 in pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2781–2782 in respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2863 in silicosis, IV:3055 Alveolitis extrinsic allergic, III:1716–1718 from interstitial lung diseases, III:1773 Alveolo-capillary junction, I:67 Alzheimer’s Association on Alzheimer’s disease, I:136, 139 on caregivers, II:1026 on nursing homes, II:1026 Alzheimer’s disease, I:134–141, 137, II:696 aging and, I:69 amyloidosis with, I:161 aphasia from, I:333 brain biopsy for, I:567–568 cell therapy for, II:686 with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:694 color blindness from, II:860 defined, I:134 dementia from, II:1024 demographics of, I:134 diagnosis of, I:137 Down syndrome and, II:1099, III:2174 electroencephalography for, II:1151 familial, II:696 MRI for, III:2083 music therapy for, III:2220 PET scan for, IV:2677 presymptomatic testing of, III:1436 prevention of, I:140 prognosis for, I:140 vs. PSP, IV:2722 senior’s health and, IV:2997–3001 treatment for, I:137–140 urinary incontinence from, V:3453 Alzheimer’s Disease Research Centers, I:140 AM. See Authentic movement Amanita phalloides poisoning by, III:2267 poisoning with, III:2028 Amanitins delirium from, II:1021 in mushroom poisoning, III:2268 Amantadine for cross infection, III:1675 with decongestants, II:1012 for Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1370 for influenza, III:1835 for influenza prevention, III:1836 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 3638 for Parkinson disease, I:296, 297 for pneumonia, IV:2640 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 for viral infections, I:315, 316–317 Amaryllis poisoning, IV:2643 Ambenonium chloride, II:794 Ambien. See Zolpidem Ambiopia. See Diplopia AmBisome. See Amphotericin B Amblyomma americanum, II:1142 Amblyopia, I:141–143, 141 eye examination for, II:1262 ptosis and, IV:2772 from strabismus, IV:3176 vision training for, V:3508 Ambulation aids for kneecap removal, III:1928 for paralysis, IV:2492 after pelvic fractures, IV:2520 for ptosis, IV:2772 See also Assistive technology devices Ambulatory care for amniocentesis, I:155 for mastectomy, III:2130 Ambulatory care facilities infection control for, III:1822 with laser surgery, III:1961 Ambulatory electrocardiography, II:1147, III:1653–1655 for arrhythmias, I:353 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:407 vs. electrophysiologic tests, II:1163 for myocardial ischemia, III:1869 for palpitations, IV:2465 for paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, IV:2505 for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 Ambulatory surgery, III:1426 arthroscopy as, I:364 laser surgery as, III:1961 for mastectomy, III:2130 sedation for, IV:2983 Amcill. See Ampicillin AMD. See Macular degeneration Amebas. See Amoebas Amebiasis, I:143–146, 143 antihelminthic drugs for, I:273 antiprotozoal drugs for, I:298 vs. granuloma inguinale, III:1483 hemoptysis from, III:1589 indigestion from, III:1813 Amebic dysentery. See Amebiasis Amebic liver abscess, I:144 Amebicides, I:145 Ameboma, I:144 Amelia. See Ectromelia Amenorrhea, I:146–148, III:2169, 2171–2172 in anorexia nervosa, I:212 with galactorrhea, III:1375 vs. oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 prolactin test for, IV:2723 sex hormone tests for, IV:3013 therapeutic touch for, V:3282 Amerge. See Naratriptan American Academy of Clinical Toxicology, IV:3169 American Academy of Dermatology on body piercing, IV:2599 on sunscreens, IV:3220 American Academy of Family Physicians on dog bites, I:500 on tetanus vaccinations, V:3265 on vaccination, V:3465 American Academy of Neurology on concussion, II:879 on multiple sclerosis therapy, III:2252 American Academy of Ophthalmology, III:1728 American Academy of OtolaryngologyHead and Neck Surgery, IV:2996 American Academy of Pediatrics on children’s health, II:761–762 on circumcision, II:813 Committee on Infectious Diseases, V:3265 on hermaphroditism, III:1847 American Association for Naturopathic Physicians, IV:2323 American Association of Blood Banks on blood donation, V:3367 on blood typing and crossmatching, I:531 American Association of Endodontists, IV:2914 American Association of Marriage and Family Therapy, III:2122–2123 American Association of Sexual Educators, Counselors, and Therapists, IV:3016 American Association on Mental Retardation, III:2173 American bayberry. See Bayberry American Board of Holistic Medicine, III:1652 American Botanical Council, III:1457 American Cancer Society on acute leukemia, III:1987 on alternative therapies, III:1503 on anal cancer, I:170 on bladder cancer, I:506 on breast cancer, I:579 on breast self-examination, I:591 on cancer, II:632, 633, 634 on cancer statistics, III:2166 on cancer support groups, III:2099 on chronic leukemia, III:1990 on head and neck cancer, III:1516, 1519 on on Hodgkin’s disease, III:1644 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 on coronary heart disease, II:929 Council on Cardio-Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, II:927 on deep vein thrombosis, II:1013 on defibrillation, II:1015 on diet therapy, II:1070 on graduated compression stockings, II:1171 on heart attacks, III:1532 on heart disease risks, III:2166 on heart failure, III:1537 on Heimlich maneuver, III:1564 on hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 on implantable cardioverter-defibrillators, III:1803 on intermittent pneumatic compression, II:1171 on ischemia, III:1868 on ischemia prevention, III:1871 on marijuana, III:2121 on pulmonary embolism, II:1169, IV:2779 on senior’s health, IV:2996, 3000 on streptococcal antibody tests, IV:3181 on stroke, III:2167 American hemorrhagic fever, III:1591 American Holistic Medicine Association, III:1652 American honeysuckle. See Honeysuckle American Medical Association on acupuncture, I:41 on Atkins diet, I:401 on female genital mutilation, II:1307 on homeopathy, III:1658, 1662, 1664, 1666 on hypnotherapy, III:1729 on mammography, III:2110 on meditation, V:3594 American Music Therapy Association, III:2270 American Nurse’s Association, V:3283 American Optical/Hardy, Rand, and Ritter Pseudoisochromatic test, II:860 American Optometric Association on eye examination, II:1262 on pinguecula and pterygium, IV:2602 American Psychiatric Association on bedwetting, I:454 on homosexuality, III:1416 on malingering, III:2100, 2101 on psychosocial disorders, IV:2767–2768 on schizoaffective disorder, IV:2956 on seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 on substance abuse, IV:3210 American Psychological Association, I:52, 98 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 American Red Cross on blood donation, I:525, V:3367 blood typing and crossmatching by, I:531 on cardiopulmonary resuscitation, II:662 on Heimlich maneuver, III:1564 American Reflexology Certification Board, IV:2845 American Reiki Association, IV:2849 American Rheumatism Association, IV:3233 American skullcap. See Skullcap American Society for Laser Medicine and Surgery, III:1960 American Speech-Language-Hearing Association, IV:3121 American Urological Association, IV:2735 Amethopterin. See Methotrexate Amikacin, I:150, 151 for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for mycetoma, III:2275 with tacrolimus, III:1798 Amiloride, for edema, II:1088 Amino acid therapy for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:166 for cocaine addiction, II:833 Amino acids, IV:2367 for coronary heart disease, II:931 in cystinuria, II:990 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 in Hartnup disease, III:1511 screening for disorders in, I:148–149 with vegetarianism, V:3486 vitamin B6 and, V:3514 Aminoaciduria amino acid screening for, I:148 from Hartnup disease, III:1511 Aminocaproic acid, for hyphema, III:1728 Aminoglutethimide cortisol test with, II:937 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 Aminoglycosides, I:149–151, I:241, 242 for bartonellosis, I:452 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 hearing loss from, III:1528 with influenza vaccine, V:3466 kidney damage from, IV:2337 Aminolevulinate dehydratase gene, IV:2671 Aminopenicillins, I:240, V:3345 Aminophylline for anaphylaxis, I:179 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with beta blockers, I:477 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 3639 Aminophylline on kidney cancer, III:1909 on liver cancer, III:2019 on mammography, III:2110 on multiple myeloma, III:2239 on ovarian cancer, IV:2439 on pancreatic cancer prevention, IV:2477 on pap smear, IV:2484 on pelvic exams, IV:2517 on physical examination, IV:2593 on prostate cancer, IV:2730, 2737 on prostate cancer screening, IV:2734 on PSA test, IV:2735 on sarcomas, IV:2944 on smoking cessation, IV:3105 on stomach cancer, IV:3164 on testicular cancer, V:3256 on thyroid cancer, V:3306 American College of Cardiology, II:738, III:1803 American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, IV:2517 American College of Physicians, III:2060 American College of Radiology, III:2110, 2111 American College of Rheumatology, II:1327 American College of Sports Medicine on atherosclerosis, I:397 on coronary heart disease prevention, II:933 on exercise, III:1535 on ischemia prevention, III:1871 American College of Surgeons, III:2110 American Dental Association, II:946 on fluoride, III:2197 on oral piercing, IV:2599 American Diabetes Association on blood glucose tests, I:529 on diabetic diets, II:1051 on glycosylated hemoglobin test, III:1469 American Dietetic Association on Atkins diet, I:401 on diabetic diets, II:1051 on hypokalemia, III:1741 American Family Physician, III:1866 American Heart Association on alcohol drinking, III:1536 on antibiotics, III:2208 on atherosclerosis, I:397 on Atkins diet, I:401 on atrial fibrillation, I:408 on blood pressure, III:1720 on cardiopulmonary resuscitation, II:662 on chelation therapy, II:738 on congenital heart diseases, II:902 on coronary artery bypass grafting, II:925 Aminophylline with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 Aminosalicylic acid, IV:2337 Aminotransferase. See Transaminases Amiodarone for atrial flutter, I:408 for heart attacks, III:1534 Amitriptyline, I:256 for ADHD, I:412 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 with bronchodilators, I:602 cholestasis from, II:784 for ciguatera, II:1334 for cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:981 for depression, I:258–259, II:1034 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 for mood disorders, III:2217 for neuralgia, IV:2340 with opioid analgesics, I:178 overdose, II:1104 for pain, IV:2460, 2463 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 for phobias, I:73 for PSP, IV:2722 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 for tension headache, V:3255 with zolpidem, I:284 Amlopidine, for hypertension, II:629 Ammi visnaga. See Khellin Ammonia ARDS from, I:67 from chronic kidney failure, II:806 with gastric lavage, IV:3169 in liver encephalopathy, III:2022 liver function tests for, III:2024–2027 lung diseases from, III:2050 Ammonium chloride electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 electrolyte imbalance from, II:1159 Amnesia, I:151–153, 152f from anoxia, I:217 anterograde (See Anterograde amnesia) from concussion, II:878 with dissociative disorders, II:1086, 1087 from dissociative identity disorder, III:2245 from general anesthesia, I:185, 187 from head injuries, III:1520 from hypothermia, III:1754 from subdural hematoma, IV:3205 Amniocentesis, I:153–157, 155, I:219, 220 for adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 for albinism, I:90 with alpha fetoprotein test, I:127, 128 3640 for birth defects, I:492 before cesarean section, II:724 for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, II:735 clubfoot from, II:822 for congenital brain defects, II:891 for cri du chat syndrome, II:955, 956 vs. CVS, II:800 for cystic fibrosis, II:988 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for Down syndrome, II:1100 for Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 for erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1229 for fifth disease, II:1329 genetic counseling and, III:1429–1430 for genetic disorders, III:1437–1438 for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 with high-risk pregnancy, III:1632 for lipidoses, III:2006 for mental retardation prevention, III:2176 for multiple pregnancy, III:2248 for Niemann-Pick disease, III:2005 with polyhydramnios and oligohydramnios, IV:2664 with pregnancy, IV:2697 for premature labor, IV:2701 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 for respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 for sickle cell disease, IV:3046 for Tay-Sachs disease, III:2005 with ultrasonography, IV:2525 See also Chorionic villi sampling; Prenatal diagnosis Amnion in induced labor, III:1816 infections of, III:1812 in multiple pregnancy, III:2247 rupture of, IV:2697 antepartum tests after, I:221 after CVS, II:801 from incompetent cervix, III:1812 premature, IV:2703–2705 Amnionitis, IV:2704 Amniotic band syndrome, II:887 Amniotic fluid in alpha fetoprotein test, I:127 amniocentesis and, I:153, 154 birth defects and, I:492 in childbirth, II:757 with esophageal atresia, II:1238 excess (See Polyhydramnios) inadequate amount of (See Oligohydramnios) with premature membrane rupture, IV:2703 Amniotic fluid embolism, IV:2383, 2385 Amniotic membranes. See Amnion Amniotic sac. See Amnion Amobarbital withdrawal, V:3572 Amoebas empyema from, II:1175 travelers diarrhea from, V:3378 Amoebic abscess, I:13 Amoxepine, I:257 Amoxicillin, I:240, IV:2527 for animal bite infections, I:207 antibiotic-associated colitis from, I:238 for antibiotic prophylaxis, IV:2726 for aortic valve stenosis, I:330 for cystitis, II:993 for gastritis, III:1406–1407 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for inclusion conjunctivitis, III:1811 for Lyme disease, III:2060 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for sinusitis, IV:3058 for strep throat, IV:3179 Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, IV:2527 for chancroid, II:730 for clenched fist injury, II:821 Amoxil. See Amoxicillin Amphetamines, II:691 abuse of, IV:3206, 3208 anosmia from, IV:3099 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 with breastfeeding, III:1943 with cortisol test, II:937 with decongestants, II:1012 delirium from, II:1021 delusions from, II:1023 with digitalis, II:1074 with general anesthetics, I:189 with growth hormone tests, III:1487 mania from, III:2112 with MAO inhibitors, II:1102 palpitations from, IV:2465 psychosis from, IV:2766 with regional anesthetics, I:191 sleep disorders from, IV:3089 substance abuse and, IV:3206 thyroid hormones and, V:3314 tremors from, V:3381 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:261 withdrawal from, V:3572 Amphotec. See Amphotericin B Amphotericin B for aspergillosis, I:376 for blastomycosis, I:513, IV:3111 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cross infection, III:1675 for cryptococcosis, II:965 for histoplasmosis, III:1641 kidney damage from, IV:2337 for leishmaniasis, III:1976 for mucormycosis, III:2232 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from snake bites, I:503 Amrinone lactate, for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 AMS. See Acute mountain sickness Amsler grid, III:2076 Amygdalin, II:1191 for liver cancer, III:2021 for Paget’s disease of the breast, III:2158 Amyl alcohol, IV:2337 Amyl nitrates abuse of, III:1416 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Amylase. See Amylases Amylases, I:160 in carbohydrate intolerance, II:649 in celiac disease, IV:3173 hypoglycemia from, III:1735 lipase and, III:2002 tests for, I:160–161 Amyloid in amyloidosis, I:161 in cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:694 Amyloid beta-protein, II:695 Amyloid beta-protein precursor, II:695 Amyloid plaques, I:135, 136, 137, I:140, I:568 Amyloid polyneuropathy, IV:2550, 2552 Amyloid precursor protein, I:135 Amyloid proteins. See Amyloid Amyloidosis, I:161–163 Addison’s disease from, I:54 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 chronic kidney failure from, II:806 familial oculo-leptomeningeal, II:696 from multiple myeloma, III:2240 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 restrictive cardiomyopathy from, IV:2872 sick sinus syndrome from, IV:3040 Amylophagia, IV:2595–2596 Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:163–167, 164f, I:422, 424 dyspnea from, IV:3036 electromyography for, II:1160 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 speech disorders from, IV:3122–3125 ANA. See Antinuclear antibodies Ana-kit, for anaphylaxis, I:180 Anabolic steroids bilirubin levels from, III:2024 with estrogens, III:1670 with fibrinogen test, II:1320 with oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with thyroid tests, V:3309 See also Steroids Anacardium, I:121 Anaerobic bacteria blood culture for, I:522–523 cultures for, V:3578 flesh-eating disease from, II:1336 food poisoning from, II:1354–1355 Anaerobic infections, I:167–168 cellulitis from, II:684 lung abscess from, III:2038 See also Human bite infections Anafranil. See Clomipramine Anagrelide, for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 Anagrelide HCI for thrombocytosis, V:3297 Anal abscess, I:214 Anal atresia, I:169 Anal canal, I:170 anoscopy of, I:214–215 in granuloma inguinale, III:1482–1483 Anal cancer, I:170–172, I:170–172 anoscopy for, I:214 gay health and, III:1415 Anal examination. See Rectal examination Anal fissure, I:210–211 anal itching from, III:1875 anoscopy for, I:214 constipation from, II:906 digital rectal examination for, IV:2833 from intestinal amebiasis, I:144 iron deficiency anemia from, III:1860 Anal fistula, II:1195 Anal intercourse gay health and, III:1415 gonorrhea from, III:1472 Anal margin, I:170 Anal plug electrodes, II:1255 Anal sphincter endorectal ultrasonography for, II:1195 in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 Anal warts, I:172–173 anoscopy for, I:214 cancer from, I:179 See also Genital warts Analgesics, I:173–175 after abortion, III:2186 acute kidney failure from, I:44 for allergic purpura, I:110 with anticonvulsants, I:256 with antimigraine agents, I:289 aromatherapy as, I:348 after arthrography, I:360 for arthroscopy, I:363, 366 with barbiturates, I:445, 447 for Bartholin’s gland cysts, I:450 3641 Analgesics for sinusitis, IV:3059 for sporotrichosis, IV:3143–3144 with tacrolimus, III:1798 Ampicillin, I:240 alanine aminotransferase levels from, III:2024 allergic purpura from, I:110 antibiotic-associated colitis from, I:238 for cystitis, II:993 for diphtheria, II:1078 for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for epiglottitis, II:1221 for food poisoning, II:1355–1356 for granuloma inguinale, III:1483–1484 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for listeriosis, III:2013–2014 for neonatal meningitis, II:1237 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for pyelonephritis, IV:2790 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for splenectomy, IV:3140 Ampicin. See Ampicillin Ampligen, for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 Amprenavir for AIDS, I:80 drug interactions with, II:1102 Ampulla of Vater, III:1881 Amputation, I:157–159, 158f from abscess, II:1007 from aneurysmectomy, I:193 from atherosclerosis, I:394, 396 from clenched fist injury, II:820 congenital, II:887–888 from diabetic foot infections, II:1053, 1054 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1057 from electric shock injuries, II:1143, 1144 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 for embolism, II:1169 fingertip, II:1332, 1333 from frostbite, II:1370 gangrene and, III:1393 from lack of foot care, II:1357 for meningococcemia, III:2158 for mycetoma, III:2275 by orthopedic surgeons, IV:2410 peripheral vascular disease and, II:1180, IV:2555 phantom limb pain from, IV:2459 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 from pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 from Raynaud disease, IV:2824 rehabilitation for, IV:2846 for sarcomas, IV:2944 Analgesics with benzodiazepines, I:467 for bites and stings, I:501 for bone biopsy, I:538 for brain tumor, I:573 with chemotherapy, II:742 for childbirth, II:757 with cholecystectomy, II:777 for colonoscopy, II:856 for craniotomy, II:947 for cryotherapy, II:963 with dronabinol, II:644 for elderly, I:70 for endometrial biopsy, II:1186 for episiotomy, II:1222 for erysipelas, II:1226 for erythema nodosum, II:1227 for face lift, II:1275 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for gangrene, III:1395 gender differences and, IV:2573 for gout, III:1477 for heart attacks, III:1533 for heart surgery, III:1544 for herniated disk, III:1628 with hydroxyzine, I:285–286 for influenza, III:1834–1835 with interferons, III:1793 for Japanese encephalitis, III:1880 for jaw fractures, III:2136 for joint replacement, III:1892 kidney damage from, IV:2337 for kidney stones, III:1918 for kidney transplantation, III:1921 for kneecap removal, III:1928 for lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1939 for laryngitis, III:1957 for laser surgery, III:1961 for liver biopsy, III:2018 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 for lumpectomy, III:2037 magnesium poisoning from, III:2079 for mallet finger, III:2102 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214, 2215 for mastectomy, III:2130 for mastoidectomy, III:2133 methadone as, III:2181–2183 for multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for myelography, III:2285 for nephrectomy, IV:2332 for neuralgia, IV:2339 opioid (See Opioid analgesics) for pain, IV:2460, 2462 for palliative cancer therapy, II:642 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 for penile prosthesis, IV:2532 for perforated eardrum, IV:2534 for pericarditis, IV:2540 with phenacetin, III:1909 3642 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for PMS, IV:2710 for porphyria, IV:2674 for post-concussion syndrome, IV:2679 with prochlorperazine, I:293 for reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2840 for root canal therapy, IV:2915–2916 for sciatica, IV:2964 for sclerotherapy, IV:2970 with sedation, IV:2983, 2984 for serum sickness, IV:3008 for sickle cell anemia, III:1578 after skin resurfacing, IV:3080 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3203 after surgery, III:1427 for tendinitis, V:3251 after thoracic surgery, V:3289 for thyroiditis, V:3319 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:259 with zolpidem, I:284 See also Aspirin Anaphylactic shock. See Anaphylaxis Anaphylaxis, I:178–180 from allergies, I:115, 116–117, 121–122 from allergy tests, I:122 from antivenin, I:501 from azithromycin, I:242, II:1233 from cephalosporins, II:694 choking from, II:772 from delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 dyspnea from, IV:3035 from echinococcosis, II:1128 hypotension from, III:1752 from ketoconazole, I:268 from plasmapheresis, IV:2619 from stings, I:499, 503 Anaplastic astrocytomas. See Astrocytomas Anaplastic ependymomas. See Ependymomas Anaprox. See Naproxen Anaspaz. See Hyoscyamine Anastomotic leak, IV:2470 Anbesol, for cold sores, II:845 Ancef. See Cefazolin Ancobon. See 5-flucytosine Ancylostoma duodenale, III:1667 Andersen’s disease, III:1467 Anderson, Dorothy, II:985 Androgen blocking agent, II:886 Androgenic alopecia, I:125, 126 Androgens adrenal virilism from, I:61–62 in amenorrhea, I:147 with anticonvulsants, I:255 birth defects from, I:490 with cholesterol tests, II:793 congenital adrenal hyperplasia from, II:884–886 with corticotropin, I:64 cortisol test with, II:937 with cyclosporine, III:1798 with erythromycin, II:1233 with fibrinogen test, II:1320 for gonadotropin deficiency, III:1748 in gynecomastia, III:1497 with haptoglobin test, III:1510 hirsutism from, III:1636 in hypogonadism, III:1737, 1738 for myelofibrosis, III:2282 with oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 with penicillins, IV:2529 prostate cancer and, I:246 protein components test and, IV:2745 in puberty, IV:2772 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 tests for, IV:3012–3014 thyroxine levels and, V:3309 Anemia, I:180–185, 183 2,3-DPG in, V:3419–3420 from acute kidney failure, I:44 from alemtuzumab, I:103 from anoxia, I:216 antenatal tests for, I:219 with antiangina agents, I:230 from anticancer drugs, I:246 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 aplastic (See Aplastic anemia) from babesiosis, I:433 with barbiturates, I:446 bilirubin and, III:2027 with bleeding time test, I:514 blood transfusions and, V:3366, 3367 bone marrow aspiration for, I:547, 549 from celiac disease, II:682 from chemotherapy, II:741 from chronic kidney failure, II:806 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 complete blood count for, I:521 Coombs’ tests for, II:915–916 from cutaneous larvae migrans, II:974 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 with dialysis, II:1060 dry mouth from, II:1109 from dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 from dyspepsia, II:1119 EGD for, II:1246 erythropoietin and, II:1234 ESR and, II:1231 fetal, from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1228 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from vasculitis, V:3480 from Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3544 See also Thalassemia Anemic anoxia, I:216 Anencephaly alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 in congenital brain defects, II:890 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 Anerexiants, II:691 Anergy, with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 Anesthesia for childbirth, II:760 epidural (See Epidural anesthesia) for gastrostomy, III:1411 general (See General anesthesia) for laparoscopy, III:1948 with laser surgery, I:495 local (See Local anesthesia) for sedation, IV:2983–2984 Anesthetics, I:185–189, 188t acupuncture as, I:36–37 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with barbiturates, I:445, 447 with benzodiazepines, I:467, 469 for bites and stings, I:503 for breast biopsy, I:575 for cervical disk disease, II:719 dental (See Dental anesthetics) with dronabinol, II:644 for hernia repair, III:1625 hiccups from, III:1632 with interferons, III:1793 with opioid analgesics, I:175 reaction to, III:1427 for surgery, III:1427 for tennis elbow, V:3252 for thyroid biopsy, V:3305 with zolpidem, I:284 Anethum graveolens. See Dill Aneurysm angiography for, I:197 aortic (See Aortic aneurysm) arteriovenous malformations and, I:357 barbiturate-induced coma and, I:443 cardiac blood pool scan for, II:654 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 vs. facial paralysis, I:461 hemoptysis from, III:1589 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 in stroke, IV:3197, 3198 with thrombolytic therapy, IV:3196 from vasculitis, V:3479 ventricular (See Ventricular aneurysm) Aneurysm clips, III:2082 Aneurysmectomy, I:193–194 Anexsia. See Hydrocodone-acetaminophen GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Angel dust. See Phencyclidine Angelica sinensis. See Dong quai Angel’s kiss. See Nevus simplex Anger bruxism from, I:608 with coronary heart disease, II:930 heart attacks from, III:1533 management of, IV:2860 myocardial ischemia from, III:1869 in oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2396 tension headache and, V:3256 Angina of effort. See Angina pectoris Angina pectoris, I:194–196 vs. achalasia, I:20 with antimigraine agents, I:290 anxiety from, I:318 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 beta blockers for, I:474 calcium channel blockers for, II:627–629 cardiac rehabilitation for, II:659 carotid sinus massage for, II:667 coronary artery bypass grafting for, II:925 from coronary heart disease, II:929 drugs for, I:229–231 from exercise test, IV:3192 from heart transplantation, III:1549 from high cholesterol, II:788 from hyperaldosteronism, III:1696 laser surgery for, III:1960 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 in men, III:2166 from sick sinus syndrome, IV:3040 sildenafil citrate and, IV:3052 surgery for, III:1534 with symptomatic ischemia, III:1868 vs. thoracic outlet syndrome, V:3286 troponins test for, V:3396 with vasodilators, V:3483 Angiocardiography, IV:2787 Angioedema. See Hives (Disease) Angiogenesis, for cancer, II:639 Angiogenesis inhibitors, III:1899 Angiography, I:196–200, 197 for angina pectoris, I:195 for aortic dissection, I:327 for atherosclerosis, I:394, 395, 396 for brain tumor, I:571 with cardiac catheterization, II:656 cerebral (See Cerebral angiography) for cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 coronary (See Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty) with coronary stenting, II:934 for death, II:1006 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 vs. electrophysiologic tests, II:1163 3643 Angiograpphy fetal hemoglobin test and, II:1312 from fifth disease, II:1328 folic acid deficiency (See Folic acid deficiency anemia) from ganciclovir, I:316 Gaucher’s disease and, III:1412, 2004, 2005 from Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 from heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 hematocrit test for, III:1571, 1572 hemoglobin test for, III:1576 hemolytic (See Hemolytic anemia) with hemophilus infections, III:1587 from hookworm disease, III:1668 hypolipoproteinemia from, III:1741 with hysterectomy, III:1762 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 from iron deficiency, III:2191 iron tests for, III:1862–1865 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 from kidney cancer, III:1910 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1939, 1940, 1941 from leishmaniasis, III:1975 from leptospirosis, III:1981 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 with malignant myeloma, III:2239 from malnutrition, III:2104 mineral supplements for, III:2196, 2197 with myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2280 from myelofibrosis, III:2282–2283 from myxoma, III:2306 nail removal for, IV:2309 from nephritis, IV:2333 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 from osteopetroses, IV:2424 from overhydration, IV:2449 pernicious (See Pernicious anemia) from plastic surgery, IV:2622 from polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 red blood cell indices for, IV:2837–2839 reticulocyte count for, IV:2874–2875 with rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 from schistosomiasis, IV:2954 from sickle cell disease, IV:3043 from starvation, IV:3161, 3162 with stomatitis, IV:3170 from sulfonamides, IV:3217 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3233 from uterine fibroids, V:3458 Angiograpphy for embolism, I:355 with endarterectomy, II:1181 fluorescein (See Fluorescein angiography) for frostbite, II:1371 for heart valve repair, III:1550 laser, for heart diseases, III:1534 for myocarditis, III:2289–2290, 2290 for pancreatectomy, IV:2469 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472, 2475 for peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2780 for stroke, IV:3196 for thoracic outlet syndrome, V:3287 for vasculitis, V:3480 See also Lymphangiography Angiomas, I:493, III:2017 Angiomatosis bacillary (See Bacillary angiomatosis) Angioplasty, I:200–202, 201f balloon (See Balloon angioplasty) cardiac rehabilitation for, II:659 for cerebral stenosis, V:3372 vs. heart valve repair, III:1550 laser (See Laser angioplasty) for renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 for renal artery stenosis, IV:2857 thallium heart scan after, V:3277 for ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 Angiosarcoma, III:2017 Angiospasm, IV:2875 Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, I:202–205 with aspirin, I:379 for atherosclerosis, I:397 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 cough from, II:941 with diuretics, II:1090 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for heart attacks, III:1534 for heart failure, III:1540 for hypertension, I:279, 280, III:1722 for myocarditis, III:2290 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 for renal artery stenosis, IV:2857 Angiotensin-converting enzyme test, I:205–206, IV:2941 Angiotensin I, I:202, 205 Angiotensin II, I:205 Angiotensin receptor blockers for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 for heart failure, III:1540 Anhydrous lanolin, IV:2310 3644 Animal-assisted therapy. See Pet therapy Animal bite infections, I:206–208, I:497, 498–503, II:820 Animal bites. See Bites and stings Animal control for bite prevention, I:207, 208 for relapsing fever prevention, IV:2853 Animal cruelty, II:882, 883 Animal dander. See Dander Animals anthrax in, I:223 bites of (See Bites and stings) hemorrhagic fevers from, III:1590, 1591, 1592 leptospirosis from, III:1981 listeriosis from, III:1783, 2012 mycobacterial infections from, III:2277 occupational asthma from, IV:2386 Q fever and, IV:2797 tularemia from, V:3410–3411 yersiniosis from, V:3592 zoonosis and, V:3599–3600 Anisakiasis, IV:2923 Anise, for anemia, I:184 Aniseed, for croup, II:960 Anisometropia, I:141, 142 Anisoylated plasminogen streptokinase activator complex. See Anistreplase Anistreplase for heart attacks, III:1533–1534 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3298 Ankle edema of from congestive cardiomyopathy, II:896 from nephritis, IV:2333 in pregnancy, IV:2697 Ankle injuries, I:359 Ankle joint arthroplasty for, I:361 arthroscopy for, I:362, 364 with juvenile arthritis, III:1894 sprains of, IV:3147 Ankylosing spondylitis, I:209–210, I:422, 424 low back pain from, III:2031, 2032 uveitis from, V:3461 Ann Arbor Staging Classification, III:1646 Annulus fibrosis, III:1628 Anogenitorectal syndrome. See Lymphogranuloma venereum Anomic aphasia, I:334 Anopheles, II:1166 Anophthalmia, III:2184–2185 Anorectal abscess, I:210–211 Anorectal disorders, I:210–211, II:1300 Anorectal fistula, I:210–211 Anorexia from autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 vs. bulimia, I:612 from Chagas’ disease, II:728 dehydration from, II:1017 from hepatitis A, III:1596 from hepatitis B, III:1600 from hepatitis D, III:1605–1606 from hepatitis E, III:1608 from hookworm disease, III:1667 from immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from mood disorders, III:2216 smoking cessation drugs with, IV:3110 from tapeworm disease, V:3240 Anorexia nervosa, I:211–214 with ACE test, I:206 amenorrhea from, I:146 in children, II:762 FSH test for, II:1350 general adaptation syndrome with, III:1425 hypokalemia from, II:1158, III:1740 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388 prolactin test and, IV:2723 sex hormone tests for, IV:3013 starvation from, IV:3161 Anoscopy, I:214–215 for anal cancer, I:170 for anorectal disorders, I:210 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 Anosmia, I:215–216, III:2004, IV:3098–3102 Anovulation, IV:2654–2655 Anoxemia. See Anoxia Anoxia, I:216–217, IV:2866 with altitude sickness, I:133 in aviation, I:427 cluster headache from, II:824 delirium from, II:1021 fetal (See Perinatal asphyxia) from frostbite, II:1371 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 from near drowning, IV:2327 with nitrous oxide, I:187 oxygen therapy for, III:1838 from pneumothorax, IV:2642 ventricular fibrillation from, V:3499 ANS. See Autonomic nervous system Ansaid. See Flurbiprofen Antabuse. See Disulfiram Antacids, I:217–219 with alendronate, I:544 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antituberculosis drugs, I:310 with benzodiazepines, I:233 constipation from, II:906 with dicyclomine, I:309 drug interactions with, II:1102 for dyspepsia, II:1119 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1291 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for heel spurs, III:1562 for herniated disk, III:1628 for hypercalcemia, III:1698 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for osteoarthritis, IV:2999 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for pleurisy, IV:2631 for postpolio syndrome, IV:2684 for sports injuries, IV:3146 for tendinitis, V:3251 for thrombophlebitis, V:3300, 3301 for thyroiditis, V:3319 Anti-insomnia agents, I:282–284, 283t with barbiturates, I:445 with benzodiazepines, I:469 central nervous system depressants as, II:688–689 with hydroxyzine, I:285 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214, 2215 with opioid analgesics, I:178 with prochlorperazine, I:293 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:259 urinary incontinence from, V:3455 Anti-itch drugs. See Antipruritics Anti-Tuss. See Guaifenesin Antiacne agents, I:226–229, 227t Antiaddiction drugs, I:52, IV:3210 Antiallergic agents with catecholamines tests, II:677 with vasodilators, V:3484 Antiandrogens for acne, I:26 for paraphilias, IV:3019 Antiangina agents, I:229–231, 230t Antianxiety drugs, I:231–233, 232t, 320, 466–469 abuse of, IV:3207, 3209 for anorexia nervosa, I:213 birth defects from, I:490 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for craniotomy, II:946–947 for dementia, II:1026 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 with estrogens, III:1670 impotence from, III:1805 for insomnia, III:1844 overdose, II:1104–1105 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for PTSD, IV:2686 for somatoform disorders, IV:3116 Antiarrhythmia agents, I:233–236 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 with defibrillation, II:1016 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 with electric countershock, II:666 electrophysiologic tests with, II:1163 for heart attacks, III:1534 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with implantable cardioverter-defibrillators, III:1803 jaundice from, III:1881 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for ventricular aneurysm, V:3497 for ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 for ventricular tachycardia, V:3504 for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 Antiasthmatic drugs, I:236–238, 237t anxiety from, I:318 with decongestants, II:1012 for occupational asthma, IV:2387 sleep disorders from, IV:3089 thyroid hormones and, V:3314 with vasodilators, V:3484 Antibacterials aromatherapy as, I:349 for burns, I:618 with middle ear ventilation, III:2305 for wound repair, III:1936–1937 Antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238–240 cephalosporins and, I:242 diarrhea from, II:1066 Antibiotic-associated enterocolitis. See Antibiotic-associated colitis Antibiotic prophylaxis, IV:2726–2727 for bacterial endocarditis, IV:2787 for bowel preparation, I:562–563 Antibiotic resistance. See Microbial drug resistance Antibiotic susceptibility test for sputum, IV:3149 wound cultures for, V:3579 Antibiotic therapy. See Antibiotics Antibiotics, I:240–243, 241, 242f with abscess drainage, I:15 for acne, I:25–26 for acute lymphangitis, I:47 adenoid hyperplasia and, I:55 allergy tests for, I:123 ammonia levels from, III:2024 for amputation, I:159 for anaerobic infections, I:168 for angiomas, I:495 for animal bite infections, I:207, 500–502 for anthrax, I:225 with anticancer drugs, I:247 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antimigraine agents, I:291 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 with antirheumatic drugs, I:307 with antiulcer drugs, I:313 aplastic anemia from, I:337 for APSGN, I:48 for ARDS, I:68 for arthroplasty, I:362 for asbestosis, I:370 for atelectasis, I:390 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for bacillary angiomatosis, I:435 bacteremia and, I:436 3645 Antibiotics with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 with folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 gastric acid determination and, III:1400 with gastric MALT lymphomas, III:2109 for gastrinomas, III:1404 for heartburn, III:1554 for hiatal hernias, III:1624 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 hypophosphatemia from, IV:2585 magnesium poisoning from, III:2079 for mastocytosis, III:2133 metabolic alkalosis from, III:2180 with methenamine, V:3447, 3449 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 with tetracyclines, V:3267 with thiamine, I:470 Antecollis, V:3340 Antecubital artery, II:655 Antenatal tests, I:219–221 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for Down syndrome, II:1100 electronic fetal monitoring, II:1161–1163 rubella test, IV:2928–2929 Antepartum tests, I:221–223 See also Antenatal tests Anterior cruciate ligament, I:362 Anterior nosebleed. See Nosebleed Anterograde amnesia, I:92, 152, III:1930 Anthelmintics, I:273–275 for roundworm infections, IV:2924 for trichinosis, V:3386 Anthemis tinctora. See Chamomile Anthony’s fire. See Erysipelas Anthracosis. See Black lung disease Anthracyclines, III:1899 Anthrax, I:223–226, 224 Anthrax vaccination, I:223–224, 225, III:1495, V:3465 Anti-DNase, III:1776 Anti-Dnase-B. See Antideoxyribonuclease-B titer Anti-estrogens, III:2161 Anti-inflammatory agents for amyloidosis, I:162 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 aplastic anemia from, I:337 aromatherapy as, I:348, 349 aspirin as, I:378 for asthma, I:601 with cataract surgery, II:672 with diethylcarbamazine, II:1331 for epididymitis, II:1219 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 glucocorticoids as, II:935 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 Antibiotics for bad breath, I:437 for balanitis, I:440 for Bartholin’s gland abscess, I:450 for bartonellosis, I:452 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1203 bilirubin levels from, III:2024 birth defects from, I:490 for blepharoplasty, I:518–519 blood culture and, I:522 for botulism, I:561 botulism and, I:561 with bowel preparation, I:562–563 for brain abscess, I:567 for breast infection, III:1943 for breast infections, II:1325 broad spectrum (See Broad spectrum antibiotics) for bronchiectasis, I:597 for bronchitis, I:599 for brucellosis, I:606 for burns, I:618 for campylobacteriosis, II:631 with candidiasis, II:645 for carbuncle, I:537 for cardiac catheterization, II:656 for cat-scratch disease, II:670 for cataracts, II:675 for cellulitis, II:685 for cervical infections, III:1829 for cervicitis, II:723 for chancroid, II:730 with chickenpox, II:750–751 for children, II:764 for chlamydial pneumonia prevention, II:771 for cholangitis, II:775 for cholera, II:782 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 with cholesterol tests, II:793 for chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 with cisapride, I:273 for clenched fist injury, II:821 for CNS infections, II:690 colitis from, I:238 with colonoscopy, II:857 for colostomy, II:862 for common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 for complement deficiencies, II:874 with congenital heart disease, II:902 for congenital ureter anomalies, II:895–896 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 for conjunctivitis, II:903 for contact dermatitis, II:909 for COPD, II:811 for cor pulmonale, II:917 after corneal transplant, II:920 for corneal ulcers, II:922 for corns, II:924 3646 for craniotomy, II:947 for Crohn’s disease, II:958, 959 cross infection and, III:1674, 1676 after cystectomy, II:983 for cystitis, II:993 after cystoscopy, II:997 for dacryocystitis, II:1004 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 delirium from, II:1021 for dental caries, V:3330 for dermatitis, II:1038 with dermatomyositis, III:2295 for diabetic foot, II:1054 with diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1056 for diaper rash, II:1063 diarrhea from, II:1066 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 dizziness from, II:1095 drug interactions with, II:1102 for dyspepsia, II:1119 for ear infections, II:1121, 1123 otitis media, IV:2435 otitis media with effusion, III:2304 E.coli and, II:1236, 1237, III:1581 for ehrlichiosis, II:1142 for elderly, I:70 for empyema, II:1176–1177 for encephalitis, II:1179 for endocarditis, II:1184 for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for epididymitis, II:1219, IV:2974 for epiglottitis, II:1220 with erythromycins, II:1233 for eye infections (See Ophthalmic antibiotics) for face lift, II:1276 for female genital mutilation, II:1307 for fever, II:1315 for fingertip injuries, II:1333 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 fluoroquinolones, II:1344–1346 for food poisoning, II:1354, 1355–1356 for furunculosis, I:537 after gallstones, III:1390 for gangrene, III:1394, 1396 for gastritis, III:1406–1407 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 for giardiasis, III:1451 for glomerulonephritis, III:1462, 1463 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for graft vs. host disease, III:1482 for granuloma inguinale, III:1483–1484 for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 for heart murmurs, III:1542 for heart transplantation, III:1546, 1548 with heart valve diseases, V:3474 for heart valve replacement, III:1552 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567–1568 with hemofiltration, I:45 for hemolytic anemia, III:1589 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 with hernia repair, III:1627 hives from, III:1642 for human bite infections, III:1678 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 for hypothermia, III:1755 hysterosonography with, III:1768 for immunologic deficiency syndromes, III:1791 immunologic diseases and, III:1786 for impetigo, III:1802 indigestion and, III:1813 for infectious arthritis, III:1820 for infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 jaundice from, III:1881 for joint replacement, III:1892 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 for keratitis, III:1905 for keratosis pilaris, III:1907 kidney damage from, IV:2337, 2338 for kidney stones, III:1918 for kidney transplantation, III:1920, 1922 for labyrinthitis, III:1935 for lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1939 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 for leptospirosis, III:1982 in life support, III:2000 for listeriosis, III:2013–2014 in livestock, V:3487 with loperamide, I:265 for lung abscess, III:2039, 2040 for lung diseases, III:2051 for Lyme disease, III:2059–2060 for lymphadenitis, III:2065 for lymphocytopenia, III:2070 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 malabsorption syndromes and, III:2086 for malaria, III:2090 for MALT lymphomas, III:2108, 2109 mastoidectomy and, III:2133 for mastoiditis, III:2134 for medullary sponge kidney, III:2149 for meningitis, III:2156, 2157 for meningococcemia, III:2158 with middle ear ventilation, III:2304 for miscarriage, III:2205 for mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206, 2207 for mitral valve prolapse, III:2208 for mouth injuries, III:2137 for mumps, III:2256 with myasthenia gravis, III:2274 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for prostate biopsy, IV:2727 prostate ultrasound and, IV:2736 for prostatitis, IV:2740–2741 for protein-energy malnutrition, IV:2744 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 for puerperal infection, IV:2774–2775 for pulmonary valve insufficiency, IV:2787 with pulmonary valve stenosis, IV:2788 for pyelonephritis, IV:2790 for rabies, IV:2802 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for rashes, IV:2821 resistance to (See Microbial drug resistance) for respiratory acidosis, IV:2861 for respiratory infections, II:1174 for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 after retrograde ureteropyelography, IV:2894 for RMSF, IV:2911 for root canal therapy, IV:2915 for rosacea, IV:2917 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2935, 2936 for scarlet fever, IV:2952 for SCID, IV:3010 for scrub typhus, IV:2977 for sepsis, IV:3004 for septic shock, IV:3005 serum sickness from, IV:3007–3008 for shigellosis, IV:3028, 3029 for sickle cell anemia, III:1578 for sinusitis, IV:3058 for skin biopsy, IV:3065 for skin lesions, IV:3076 with smelling disorders, IV:3100 for sore throats, IV:3119 for splenectomy, IV:3140 sputum culture for selection, IV:3148 for stapedectomy, IV:3155 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3158 for STDs, IV:3022 before stool O & P test, IV:3174 for strep throat, IV:3178–3179, 3223, V:3327 with streptococcal antibody tests, IV:3180 for streptococcal infections, I:220, IV:2542, 3184 for syphilis, IV:3229 for T & A, V:3326 testing of, with throat cultures, V:3293 for tetanus, V:3264–3265 throat cultures and, V:3294 for thyroiditis, V:3319 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for tooth extraction, V:3332 topical (See Topical antibiotics) for toxic shock syndrome, V:3347 after tracheotomy, V:3354 for trachoma, V:3356 after transurethral bladder resection, V:3375 for travelers diarrhea, V:3379 with tricuspid valve insufficiency, V:3389 for tricuspid valve stenosis, V:3390 for tularemia, V:3411 for tumors (See Antitumor antibiotics) for urethritis, V:3441 with urinary catheterization, V:3451 for vagotomy patients, V:3470 with ventricular shunts, V:3502 for vesicoureteral reflux, V:3505 for vibriosis, V:3507 vitamin K deficiency from, V:3519 for vitrectomy, V:3528 vulvovaginitis and, V:3540 for wheezing, V:3554 wound cultures and, V:3579 for wounds, III:1936–1937, V:3580, 3583 for XLA, V:3586 Antibloodclotting drugs. See Anticoagulants Antibodies allergic purpura from, I:110 in allergies, I:115, 122 in anaphylaxis, I:179 in autoimmune diseases, I:422–423, 424, III:1475 b lymphocytes and, III:1986 blood tests for, I:525 in breast milk, III:1942 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 in common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 in discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for enteroviruses, II:1213 in erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1228 in gammaglobulin, III:1391 in immunologic deficiency syndromes, III:1790–1791 for kidney transplantation, III:1922 in lymphatic system, III:2062 with lymphocytopenia, III:2070 monoclonal (See Monoclonal antibodies) in multiple myeloma, III:2238 in plasmapheresis, IV:2619 serum sickness from, IV:3007 in systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3231 in yaws, V:3589 Antibody-negative asymptomatic carriers, I:83 Antibody screening tests, I:531 for autoimmune diseases, I:424 3647 Antibody screening tests for mycetoma, III:2275 for mycobacterial infections, III:2277 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2280 for myocarditis, III:2290 with nasal irrigation, IV:2312 with nasal packing, IV:2313 for nasal polyps, IV:2316 for nasal trauma, IV:2318, 2319 with nasopharyngeal culture, IV:2321 for necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 with neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 for neutropenia, IV:2353 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 for nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2381 ophthalmic (See Ophthalmic antibiotics) for orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2407 for orchitis, IV:2408 for osteomyelitis, IV:2420 for otitis media, IV:2435 for otitis media with effusion, III:2304 ototoxicity from, IV:2437 after pacemaker implantation, IV:2424 for pancreatitis, IV:2480 for parrot fever, IV:2506, 2507 for perforated eardrum, IV:2534 for pericarditis, IV:2540 for periodontal diseases, IV:2548 peripheral neuropathy and, IV:2553 for peritonitis, I:339 photosensitivity from, III:1715, IV:2589 for PID, IV:2523 for piercing and tattoo infections, IV:2599 for plague, IV:2616 for plastic surgery, IV:2622 platelet aggregation test and, IV:2623 for pleural effusion, IV:2629 for pleurisy, IV:2632, 2633 for pneumonia, IV:2634, 2635, 2636, 2640 after portal vein bypass, IV:2676 for premature labor, IV:2701 for premature membrane rupture, IV:2705 with prematurity, IV:2706 for proctitis, I:211, IV:2719 prolonged QT syndrome from, IV:2724 prophylaxis with, IV:2726–2727 Antibody screening tests for Chagas’ disease, II:728 cytomegalovirus and, II:998–999 for dengue fever, II:1028 for Epstein-Barr virus, II:1223–1225 for erysipelas, II:1226 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1776 for infectious mononucleosis, IV:3119 for Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 for leishmaniasis, III:1976 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 for measles, III:2139 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for rubella (See Rubella test) for scrub typhus, IV:2976 for streptococcal infections, IV:3180–3182 for syphilis, IV:3229 for yersiniosis, V:3593 Anticancer drugs, I:246–249, 247–249t acute leukemia and, III:1989 with antimalarials, I:288 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 aplastic anemia from, I:183, 337 birth defects from, I:490 for bladder cancer, I:508 with bleeding time test, I:514 for brain tumors, I:573 with breastfeeding, III:1943 chemotherapy with, II:740–743 delirium from, II:1021 for endometrial cancer, II:1191 with gout drugs, III:1480 for histiocytosis, III:1639 histoplasmosis with, III:1640 for kidney cancer, III:1910 kidney damage from, IV:2337 lactose intolerance from, II:649 for lymphomas, III:2093 menorrhagia from, II:1112 MMR vaccine with, III:2256 neutropenia from, IV:2353 ototoxicity from, IV:2437 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 Anticholinergics. See Cholinergic antagonists Anticlotting drugs. See Anticoagulants Anticoagulants, I:250–252 for angioplasty, I:201 with antiarrhythmics, I:236 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 with aspirin, I:378 for atherectomy, I:392 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for balloon valvuloplasty, I:443 with bleeding time test, I:514 3648 in blood glucose tests, I:529 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 bruises from, I:607 with cephalosporins, II:694 with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 for cor pulmonale, II:917 in coronary artery bypass grafting, II:927 for coronary heart disease, II:931 for coronary stenting, II:934, 935 for deep vein thrombosis, II:1014 for dialysis, II:1060 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 with ECMO, II:1257 for embolism, II:1171 with erythromycins, II:1233 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 with gout drugs, III:1480 for heart attacks, III:1533, 1534 with heart biopsy, III:2287 with heart valve replacement, III:1551 for hemolytic uremic syndrome, II:1237 with hemoptysis, III:1589 with HRT, III:1670 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 leech saliva as, III:1971 with mifepristone, III:2186 for miscarriage prevention, IV:2837 for mitral valve insufficiency, III:2207 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 with myelography, III:2284 with nalidixic acid, V:3449 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 with prochlorperazine, I:294 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785 with raloxifene, I:544 for renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 for renal vein thrombosis, IV:2859 for retinal vein occlusion, IV:2879 with skin biopsy, IV:3065 with small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 with SSRIs, IV:2993 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:270 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 with thrombolytic therapy, IV:3197, V:3300 for thrombophlebitis, V:3300–3301 thyroid hormones and, V:3314 tooth extraction and, V:3332 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:261 vs. vena cava filter, V:3491 for ventricular aneurysm, V:3497 Anticonvulsants, I:252–256 with antimalarials, I:288 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 aplastic anemia from, I:337 with aspirin, I:379 with barbiturates, I:445, 447 with benzodiazepines, I:467, 469 for bipolar disorder, I:488 birth defects from, I:490 for brain tumors, I:572, 573 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 central nervous system depressants as, II:688 with cephalosporins, II:694 for cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 congenital brain defects and, II:891 congenital heart diseases from, II:900 for craniotomy, II:946–947 delirium from, II:1021 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 with dronabinol, II:644 with electroencephalography, II:1152 for encephalitis, II:1179 erythema multiforme from, II:1226 with estrogens, III:1670 fetal hemoglobin test and, II:1313 with gout drugs, III:1481 for head injuries, III:1522 with hydroxyzine, I:285 for mania, III:2113 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 for meningitis, III:2156 for migraines, I:289, III:2189 for neuralgia, IV:2339 neutropenia from, IV:2353 nystagmus from, IV:2372 with opioid analgesics, I:178 for pain, IV:2460, 2463 parathyroid hormone test and, IV:2495 with penicillins, IV:2529 with prochlorperazine, I:293 psychosis from, IV:2766 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 spina bifida from, IV:3126 with SSRIs, I:258 for subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3200 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 for subdural hematoma, IV:3205 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3300 toxic epidermal necrolysis from, V:3345 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:261 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for premature ejaculation, IV:2700 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for PTSD, IV:2686 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 for sciatica, IV:2964 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979–2980 for self mutilation, IV:2994 for shingles, IV:3032 for sleep disorders, V:3391 for somatoform disorders, IV:3116 St. John’s wort as, IV:3151 for stress, IV:3186 after stroke, IV:3196 stuttering and, IV:3199 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:270 for tinnitus, V:3323 tricyclic (See Tricyclic antidepressants) See also Monoamine oxidase inhibitors Antidiabetic drugs, I:261–264, 263t antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with antimalarials, I:288 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 with aspirin, I:378 with beta blockers, I:477 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 with myelography, III:2285 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with sunscreens, IV:3221 thyroid hormones and, V:3314 Antidiarrheal drugs, I:264–266 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with digitalis, II:1075 with E. coli infections, II:1237 with food poisoning, II:1355 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 with penicillins, IV:2529 before stool O & P test, IV:3174 Antidiuretic hormone test, I:266–267 Antidiuretic hormones. See Vasopressins Antidotes for drug overdose, II:1106 for poisoning, IV:2645 for poisonous gases, IV:3102 Antiemetics, I:292–294, 293t with anticancer drugs, I:247 antihistamines as, I:276 for chemotherapy, II:742 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 for motion sickness, IV:2326 See also Nausea; Vomiting Antiepileptics. See Anticonvulsants Antifreeze, lactic acidosis from, III:1945 Antifungal drugs GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 aromatherapy as, I:349 for aspergillosis, I:376 for athlete’s foot, I:399 for candidiasis, II:646 with cisapride, I:273 for cross infection, III:1675 for diaper rash, II:1063 impotence from, III:1805 for keratitis, III:1905 for laryngitis, III:1958 for lymphocytopenia, III:2070 for meningitis, III:2156 for mycetoma, III:2275 sputum culture for selection, IV:3148 systemic (See Systemic antifungal drugs) topical (See Topical antifungal drugs) for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Antigas agents, I:271–272 Antigastroesophageal reflux agents, I:272–273 Antigen-antibody reactions allergic purpura from, I:110 to blood transfusions, V:3367–3368, 3369 extrinsic allergic alveolitis as, III:1716 vasculitis from, V:3478 with viral hepatitis tests, III:1610 Antigen tests for cryptococcosis, II:965 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for histoplamsosis, III:1640 for hypercoagulation, III:1702 for plague, IV:2615 for syphilis, IV:3229 Antigens in allergies, I:115 in Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 with kidney transplantation, III:1921 Antiglaucoma agents, V:3351 Antigout drugs, I:378, III:1479 Antihelminthic drugs. See Anthelmintics Antihemorrhagic factor. See Vitamin K Antihemorrhoid agents, I:275–276 Antihistamines, I:276–279, 278t with alcohol, II:1102–1103 for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:118–119, 121 for anaphylaxis, I:179 anosmia and, IV:3099, 3100 with anticonvulsants, I:253 for atopic dermatitis, I:404 with barbiturates, I:445, 447 with benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1203 with benzodiazepines, I:467, 469 for bites and stings, I:501, 503 3649 Antihistamines withdrawal from, V:3573 with zolpidem, I:284 Antideoxyribonuclease-B titer, IV:3180, 3181–3182 Antidepressants, I:256–258, 257t, II:1034–1035 for acute stress disorder, I:49 for agoraphobia, I:73 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:137, 138 amenorrhea from, I:146 for anorexia nervosa, I:213 with antihemorrhoid agents, I:275 with antimigraine agents, I:291 for anxiety, I:231 for autism, I:420 for binge eating disorder, I:481 for bipolar disorder, I:487 bruises from, I:607 for bulimia, I:613 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 with central nervous system depressants, II:689 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:803–804 for cocaine addiction, II:833 with decongestants, II:1012 delirium from, II:1021 for dementia, II:1026 for dissociative disorders, II:1087 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 with electroencephalography, II:1152 erection disorders with, IV:3051 for factitious disorders, II:1277 female sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 gynecomastia from, III:1497 for headache, III:1524 for hypochondriasis, III:1733 for IBS, III:1867 for insomnia, III:1844 for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 for migraines, I:289 for mutism, III:2272 with myelography, III:2284 myxedema coma from, III:1757 for neuralgia, IV:2340 obesity from, IV:2374 overdose, II:1104 for pain management, IV:2463 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for phobias, IV:2583 with phototherapy, IV:2591 for PMS, IV:2710–2711 for post-concussion syndrome, IV:2679 for postpartum depression, IV:2682 Antihistamines for byssinosis, I:622 with caffeine, II:625 with catecholamines tests, II:677 for common cold, II:870–871 constipation from, II:906 for dermatitis, II:1038 for deviated septum, II:1045 with dicyclomine, I:309 with diethylcarbamazine, II:1331 with dronabinol, II:644 erection disorders with, IV:3051 for fish poisoning, II:1335 gas embolism from, II:1170 for hives, III:1642 impotence from, III:1805 for insomnia, I:282, III:1844 with interferons, III:1793 for itching, I:285, III:1875 for lichen planus, III:1997 for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998, IV:3078 magnesium poisoning from, III:2079 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214, 2215 for mastocytosis, III:2133 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for middle ear, I:427 for motion sickness, III:2219 for multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 with opioid analgesics, I:178 for otitis media, IV:2435 for otitis media with effusion, III:2304 overdose, II:1104 for Parkinson disease, I:296 with partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507 for physical allergy, IV:2592 for pityriasis rosea, IV:2609 with prochlorperazine, I:293 prolactin test and, IV:2723 prolonged QT syndrome from, IV:2724 for rash, IV:2821 for scabies, IV:2950 for secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 for serum sickness, IV:3008 sleep disorders from, IV:3089 stuttering and, IV:3199 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:259 with vasodilators, V:3484 for wheezing, V:3554 for wilderness travel, V:3563 Antihypertensive agents, I:279–281, 280t ACE test and, I:205 with aldosterone test, I:101 with antihemorrhoid agents, I:275 anxiety from, I:318 for aortic coarctation, II:830 for APSGN, I:48 3650 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 in autonomic dysreflexia, IV:3131 bad breath from, I:437 constipation from, II:906 for coronary heart disease, II:931 with cystoscopy, II:996 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 with digitalis, II:1074 for dizziness, II:1095 for eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2693 edema from, II:1134 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 erection disorders with, IV:3051 fainting from, II:1280 female sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 fracture repair and, II:1361 galactorrhea from, III:1375 for glomerulonephritis, III:1462 hyperaldosteronism and, III:1695 for hypertension, III:1722 with kidney scans, III:1915 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 with nephritis, IV:2334 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 with plasma renin activity, IV:2617 postural hypotension from, III:1752 sodium deficiency from, III:2190 for stroke prevention, IV:3197, 3198 with tetracyclines, V:3268 urinary incontinence from, V:3455 Antihyperuricemic drugs, I:281–282 Antilipemic agents, II:793 Antimalarial drugs. See Antimalarials Antimalarials, I:286–288, III:2090, 2091 bilirubin levels from, III:2024 jaundice from, III:1881 psoriatic arthritis and, IV:2759 resistance to, III:2088, 2090 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, IV:2901 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 Antimetabolites, II:740 Antimigraine agents, I:288–291, 290t, II:981 Antiminth. See Pyantel pamoate; Pyrantel Antimonium tartaricum. See Tartar emetic Antimony, for leishmaniasis, III:1976 Antimotility agents for cryptosporidiosis, II:967 for diarrhea, II:1067 for E. coli infections, II:1237, III:1581 for travelers diarrhea, V:3380 Antimyocardial antibody test, I:291–292 Antinausea drugs. See Antiemetics Antineoplastics, III:1580 Antineoplastons, III:2021 Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, V:3553 Antinuclear antibodies in hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1776 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3233 test for, I:294–295, IV:2966 Antioxidants, IV:2368 aging and, I:70–71 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:136, 138 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:166 for atherosclerosis, I:396 in Ayurvedic medicine, I:432 for cataracts, II:673 for emphysema, II:1174–1175 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699–1700 jet lag and, III:1887 Korean ginseng as, III:1456 for macular degeneration, III:2075–2076, 2077 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for tendinitis, V:3251 for thyroid cancer, V:3308 Antiparasitic agents, II:1128 Antiparkinson drugs, I:295–298, 296t with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 psychosis from, IV:2766 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 Antiphospholipid antibodies, II:702–703, 703 Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, III:1852 Antiplatelet agents. See Platelet aggregation inhibitors Antiplatelet antibodies, III:1777 Antiprotozoal drugs, I:298–299, III:1976 Antipruritics, I:284–286 for pityriasis rosea, IV:2609 for prickly heat, IV:2717 Antipsychotic agents, I:300–301, 301t with alcohol, II:1102–1103 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:138 atypical (See Atypical antipsychotic agents) for autism, I:420 for bipolar disorder, I:488 birth defects from, I:490 catatonia and, II:676–677 constipation from, II:906 for delirium, II:1022 for delusions, II:1023 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Antisocial personality disorder, IV:2564–2567 from ADHD, I:410, 413 from child abuse, II:756 conduct disorder and, II:883 vs. malingering, III:2100 oppositional defiant disorder and, IV:2396–2397 substance abuse and, IV:3208 Antispasmodic drugs, I:308–309 aromatherapy as, I:348 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Antistreptolysin O titer for APSGN, I:48 in hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1776 for strep infections, IV:3180–3182 Antithrombin III assay, for hypercoagulation, III:1702 Antithymocyte globulin. See Antithymocyte serum Antithymocyte serum, for aplastic anemia, I:337 Antithyroid agents anxiety from, I:318 aplastic anemia from, I:337 for hyperthyroidism, III:1724 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3309 thyroxine levels and, V:3309 Antitoxins botulism (See Botulinum toxins) diphtheria, II:1078 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788 serum sickness from, IV:3008–3009 tetanus, V:3265 Antitubercular agents. See Antituberculosis drugs Antituberculosis drugs, I:309–313 birth defects from, I:490 jaundice from, III:1881 Antitumor antibiotics, in chemotherapy, II:740 Antitussive agents, for cough, II:942 Antiulcer drugs, I:313–315, 314t Antivenin, for bites, I:501, 502 Antivert. See Meclizine Antiviral drugs, I:315–317 for AIDS, III:1787 with antimalarials, I:288 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 aromatherapy as, I:349 for cold sores, II:845 for cross infection, III:1675 for cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 for encephalitis, II:1179 with erythromycins, II:1233 for facial paralysis, I:463 for genital herpes, III:1442 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for heart transplantation, III:1548 for hepatitis E, III:1608 for herpes simplex, V:3339 for influenza, III:1835 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for keratitis, III:1905 after kidney transplantation, III:2030 for lymphocytopenia, III:2070 for meningitis, III:2156 for monkeypox, III:2212 for shingles, IV:3032 for skin resurfacing, IV:3080 for STDs, IV:3022 for subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3200–3201 Antivomiting drugs. See Antiemetics Antiworm drugs. See Anthelmintics Antrectomy with ulcer surgery, V:3428 for ulcers, III:1398 with vagotomy, V:3470 Anturane. See Sulfinpyrazone ANUG. See Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis Anus cancer of, I:170–172 enterobiasis and, II:1208 in hemorrhoids, I:275 injuries of, in child abuse, II:754 narrowing of, from proctitis, IV:2719 physical examination of, IV:2594 Anxietas tibialis. See Restless legs syndrome Anxietas tibiarum. See Restless legs syndrome Anxiety, I:317–322, I:322–324 from adrenal gland tumors, I:60 from agoraphobia, I:72–73 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 antimalarials and, I:286 asthma from, I:381 bruxism from, I:608 in cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 central nervous system depressants for, II:688 from child abuse, II:754 in children, II:762 cognitive therapy for, II:840 from conversion disorder, IV:3114 from decongestants, II:1011–1012 from dementia, II:1025 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2244 drugs for (See Antianxiety drugs) dyspnea from, IV:3035 in elderly, IV:2997 with fibromyalgia, II:1326 in gays and lesbians, III:1415, 1416 generalized (See Generalized anxiety disorder) group therapy for, III:1485 3651 Anxiety for elderly, I:70 vs. electroconvulsive therapy, II:1150 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 erection disorders with, IV:3051 for factitious disorders, II:1277 galactorrhea from, III:1375 for hallucinations, III:1504 impotence from, III:1805 for mania, III:2113 with myelography, III:2284 neutropenia from, IV:2353 overdose, II:1104 for paranoia, IV:2493 Parkinson disease from, I:295 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2569 photosensitivity from, III:1715 for psychotic disorders, IV:2766 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957, 2958 for schizophrenia, IV:2959, 2961–2962 for stuttering, IV:3200 tardive dyskinesia and, V:3242–3243 torticollis from, V:3340 for Tourette syndrome, V:3341 tremors from, V:3381 Antipyretics for fever, II:1315 ibuprofen as, IV:2361 naproxen as, IV:2361 Antirabies vaccination, IV:2801–2803 Antireflective coatings. See Lens coatings Antirejection agents. See Immunosuppressive agents Antiretroviral agents, I:303–305 for AIDS, I:80, 86 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 gay health and, III:1415 with gout drugs, III:1480 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1900 Antirheumatic drugs, I:305–307, IV:2901 Antiscratch coatings. See Lens coatings Antisecretory drugs for gastritis, III:1407 for stomach ulcer, V:3433–3434, 3434 Antiseizure drugs. See Anticonvulsants Antiseptics, I:307–308 aromatherapy as, I:348, 349 for atherectomy preparation, I:392 for liver biopsy, III:2018 for puerperal infection prevention, IV:2774 for toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3346 with urinary catheterization, V:3450 for wound flushing, V:3580 Antiserum, IV:3007–3008 Anxiety guided imagery for, III:1491 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 from hyperthyroidism, III:1724 from implantable cardioverter-defibrillators, III:1803 impotence from, III:1805 impulse control disorders and, III:1807 indigestion from, III:1813 from infertility, III:1809 from lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 local anesthesia for, I:191 as malingering, III:2100 MAO inhibitors for, III:2213 from mitral valve prolapse, III:2208 in motion sickness, III:2218 from MRI, III:2084 mutism from, III:2272 neurologic examination for, IV:2351 from pain, I:174 palpitations from, IV:2465 paroxysmal atrial tachycardia from, IV:2505 from PMS, IV:2710 Raynaud disease from, IV:2823–2825 salivary gland tumors from, IV:2934 sedation for, IV:2983 from sexual dysfunctions, IV:3015 during sexual intercourse, IV:3014 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 sleep terrors from, IV:2355 St. John’s wort for, IV:3151 from subdural hematoma, IV:3205 with tension pneumothorax, IV:2642 with testosterone replacement therapy, III:2162 Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome from, V:3574 Anxiety disorders, I:322–325 with acute stress disorder, I:49 from ADHD, I:411 biofeedback for, I:482 caffeine with, II:626 drugs for, I:231–233, I:232t dyspnea from, IV:3036 generalized, III:1428–1429 insomnia from, III:1843 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 from PTSD, IV:2686 SSRIs for, IV:2990 from substance abuse, IV:3208 substance abuse and, IV:3208 Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule, I:320, 323 Anxiety management training. See Relaxation techniques Anxiolytic drugs. See Antianxiety drugs Anzemet. See Dolasetron Aorta abnormalities of, II:830 CAT scan of, II:875, II:876 in congenital heart disease, II:899 3652 damage to, from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854, 2855 displaced, in tetralogy of Fallot, V:3268 in mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206 in transposition of the great arteries, V:3373–3374 Aortic aneurysm, 325–327, 325, 326f abdominal (See Abdominal aortic aneurysm) rupture of, I:160 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3201 Aortic arch. See Thoracic aorta Aortic coarctation, II:830–831, II:900, III:1543 Aortic dissection, I:327–328 Aortic enlargement, III:2114–2115 Aortic regurgitation. See Aortic valve insufficiency Aortic stenosis. See Aortic valve stenosis Aortic valve cardiac catheterization for, II:656 in endocarditis, II:1183 replacement of, III:1550–1552 Aortic valve insufficiency, I:328–329, 329f, III:2115, V:3472 from ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 from endocarditis, II:1183 heart valve repair for, III:1549 Aortic valve stenosis, I:329–330, 330, II:900, V:3472 balloon valvuloplasty for, I:442 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 general anesthetics and, I:186 heart valve repair for, III:1549 heart valve replacement for, III:1551 surgery for, III:1543 with ventricular ectopic beats, V:3498 APA. See American Psychological Association APA antibodies, II:702–703 Apert syndrome. See Acrocephalosyndactylia Apgar, Virginia, I:331, 332 Apgar testing, I:331–333 Aphakic lenses, II:675 Aphanizomenon flos-aquae, II:788 Aphasia, I:333–336, 334f, IV:3122–3124 Apheresis blood donation by, I:526 blood transfusions by, V:3367 for stem cell transplantation, III:2243 Aphthous stomatitis. See Canker sores Apicoectomy, IV:2916 Apis mellifica, I:121 Aplastic anemia, I:182, 183, 184, I:336–338 with acute leukemia, III:1987 from anticonvulsants, I:253 bone marrow transplantation for, I:550 bone marrow transplantation for, I:550 with heart biopsy, III:2287 platelet count for, IV:2624 thrombocytopenia with, II:827–828 Apnea from metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 in Munchausen syndrome, III:2257 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 from neonatal jaundice, IV:2330 of prematurity, III:1838, IV:2707 sleep (See Sleep apnea) Apo-Salvent. See Albuterol Apocrine glands, III:1704 APOE. See Apolipoprotein E Apolipoprotein, III:2007 Apolipoprotein E, I:135–136, 137 Apomorphine, III:1805 Apoptosis, II:639 Apoxia. See Altitude sickness APP. See Amyloid precursor protein Appalachian Mountain disease. See Histoplasmosis Appearance assesment, IV:2351 Appendectomy, I:338–341, 339f, I:342, III:1947 Appendicitis, I:338, 341–343, 341 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 with antacids, I:218 ascites from, I:271 barium enema for, I:449 bowel function and, I:565 vs. carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 vs. Crohn’s disease, II:956 E. coli infections and, II:1235, 1236 laxatives and, III:1964 with measles, III:2139 peritonitis from, IV:2556 vs. yersiniosis, V:3592 Appendix perforated (See Appendicitis) ruptured (See Appendicitis) Appetite, with hypothyroidism, III:1756 Appetite suppressants abuse of, IV:3206 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 arrhythmias from, I:353 cocaine as, II:831 with decongestants, II:1012 with digitalis, II:1074 erection disorders with, IV:3051 heart valve diseases from, V:3474 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214, 2215 pulmonary hypertension and, IV:2785 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Argon laser trabeculoplasty. See Trabeculoplasty Arhythmia. See Arrhythmia Ariboflavinosis. See Riboflavin deficiency Aricept. See Donepezil hydrochloride Arjuna, for coronary heart disease, II:931 ARM. See Macular degeneration Arm in achondroplasia, I:22 amputation of, III:2158 bowed, from vitamin D deficiency, V:3516 damage to, from lumpectomy, III:2037 elephantiasis of, II:1166 embolism of, I:355 endarterectomy of, II:1180 erysipelas of, II:1225 exercise, in cardiac rehabilitation, II:659 with holoprosencephaly, II:890 after mastectomy, III:2130 in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 surgery on, I:190 ulcers, from mycobacterial infections, III:2277 weakness, I:590 ARMD. See Macular degeneration Armenian syndrome. See Familial Mediterranean fever Armpit. See Axilla Arnica for fractures, II:1365 for low back pain, III:2033 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 Arnica montana. See Arnica Arnold-Chiari deformity, II:890, IV:2395 Aromatase inhibitor, II:886 Aromatherapie: Les Huiles essentielles, hormones végé tales, I:348 Aromatherapie, traitement des maladies par les essences des plantes, I:349 Aromatherapy, I:348–352, 349f, 350t for anxiety, I:321 for anxiety disorders, I:324 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 ayurvedic medicine and, I:348 for chronic bronchitis, II:811 for common cold, II:872 for COPD, II:811 for dizziness, II:1096 for dysmenorrhea, II:1118 for emphysema, II:811, 1175 for fatigue, II:1296–1297 for general adaptation syndrome, III:1425 guided imagery and, III:1491 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1503 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 in hydrotherapy, III:1693 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 for influenza, III:1835 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for laryngitis, III:1958 for mood disorders, III:2217 for palpitations, IV:2466 for papilledema, IV:2488 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 rosemary oils, I:366–367 for RSV, IV:2869 for seizures, IV:2989 for smoking cessation, IV:3106 for sore throats, IV:3119 for stings, I:503 for strep throat, IV:3179 for stress, IV:3186 for stress reduction, IV:3189 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 Aromatic plants, I:348 Aromatic remedies. See Aromatherapy Arrhenoblastoma, I:62 Arrhinencephaly. See Holoprosencephaly Arrhythmia, I:352–354 from Addison’s disease, I:54 from alcohol, II:933 ambulatory electrocardiography for, III:1653 from anaphylaxis, I:179 from angiography, I:200 from astemizole, I:113 from athletic heart syndrome, I:400 in atrial ectopic beats, I:406 from balloon valvuloplasty, I:443 beta blockers for, I:474 from blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 with bronchodilators, I:602 with caffeine, II:626 calcium channel blockers for, II:627–629 cardiac blood pool scan for, II:654 from cardiac catheterization, II:657 carotid sinus massage for, II:667 catheter ablation for, II:679 from Chagas’ disease, II:727 from chest physical therapy, II:747 from cisapride, I:272 from cocaine, II:832 with congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 after coronary artery bypass grafting, II:928 from decongestants, II:1011–1012 defibrillation and, II:1015 from dehydration, III:1409 digitalis for, II:1073 with diuretics, II:1090 from dronabinol, II:645 3653 Arrhythmia thyroid hormones and, V:3314 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 with vasodilators, V:3484 for weight loss, II:691, IV:2376 Apple seed poisoning, IV:2643 Applied kinesiology, I:343–346, III:1924–1927 Applied psychophysiological feedback. See Biofeedback Apraxia vs. aphasia, I:333 developmental (See Developmental apraxia) from liver encephalopathy, III:2023 Apresoline. See Hydralazine Apricot seed poisoning, IV:2643 Apricot vine. See Passionflower APSAC. See Anistreplase APSGN. See Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis Aptitude tests, IV:2763, 2764 Aqua therapy for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for scoliosis, IV:2972 Aquagenic urticaria, IV:2592 Aquatensen. See Thiazide diuretics Aqueous humor, III:1458, 1459–1460 ARA-C. See Cytarabine Arachnodactyly. See Marfan syndrome Arachnoiditis, III:2285 Aralen. See Chloroquine Arava. See Leflunamide Arboviruses dengue fever from, II:1027 encephalitis from, I:347–348, II:1178 Japanese encephalitis from, III:1879 ARCB. See American Reflexology Certification Board Arctium lappa. See Burdocks Arctostaphylos uva ursi. See Bearberry ARD. See Respiratory tract diseases ARDS. See Adult respiratory distress syndrome Arenavirus hemorrhagic fevers from, III:1591 LCM from, III:2069 Areola in breast reconstruction, I:587 in breast reduction, I:590 in Paget’s disease of the breast, IV:2457 ARF. See Rheumatic fever Argentinian hemorrhagic fever. See American hemorrhagic fever Arginine with cold sores, II:846 in cystinuria, II:990 for genital herpes, III:1442 with growth hormone tests, III:1487 Argon laser. See Laser surgery Arrhythmia drugs for, I:233–236 from echinococcosis, II:1128 electric countershock for, II:665 electrocardiography for, II:1148 from electrolyte imbalances, II:1158 electrophysiologic tests for, II:1163–1165 from epoetin, II:645 exercise test and, IV:3191, 3192 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369, 1370 from gammaglobulin, III:1391 glaucoma and, III:1458 from Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492, 1493 in heart attacks, III:1534 heart failure and, III:1539 from heart transplantation, III:1548 from Hismanal, I:119 from hyperkalemia, III:2194 from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 with hypoglycemia, III:1735 from hypokalemia, III:1740 from hypomagnesemia, III:2190 from hypothermia, III:1754 implantable cardioverter-defibrillators for, III:1802–1803 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 magnesium and, III:2079 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 from metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 from minoxidil, III:2203 from mitral valve prolapse, III:2207 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264, 2266 from Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 myocardial resection for, III:2288 from myocarditis, III:2289 from near drowning, IV:2327 from nitrite poisoning, III:2194 from oxytocin, II:1109 pacemaker for, IV:2453 palpitations with, IV:2465–2466 from pentamidine isoethionate, IV:2636 from prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2724–2726 from pulmonary artery catheterization, IV:2777 respiratory alkalosis and, IV:2862 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 from sedation, IV:2983, 2984 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 from sick sinus syndrome, IV:3039–3040 from sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 sildenafil citrate and, IV:3052 from tensilon test, V:3254 3654 from theophylline, I:381 from tricyclic antidepressants, I:256, 257, 258 Valsalva maneuver for, V:3471 from ventricular aneurysm, V:3497 ventricular tachycardia as, V:3503–3504 Arrow wood. See Buckthorn ArRP, IV:2880–2881 Arsenic delirium from, II:1021 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 kidney damage from, IV:2337 lung diseases from, III:2050 miscarriage from, III:2204 paresthesia from, IV:2365 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2550, 2553 poisoning, III:1560–1561 Arsenicum, for tonsillitis, V:3328 Arsenicum album for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for food poisoning, II:1356 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 for insomnia, IV:3092 for shingles, IV:3032 for sinusitis, IV:3059 The Art of Aromatherapy, I:348 Art therapy, I:367–369 for children, II:765 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2247 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1503 for psychosocial disorders, IV:2769 for stress reduction, IV:3189 Artane. See Trihexyphenidyl Arterial blood gas analysis. See Blood gas analysis Arterial embolism. See Embolism Arterial fibrillation, with embolism, I:355 Arterial gas embolism. See Gas embolism Arterial graft coronary artery bypass (See Coronary artery bypass) for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 Arterial occlusive diseases, II:654 Arterial pressure, IV:2777 Arterial switch, II:902, III:1543 Arteries antecubital, II:655 arteriovenous fistula, I:356 blood pressure and, III:1752 brain (See Cerebral arteries) carotid (See Carotid arteries) cerebral (See Cerebral arteries) coronary (See Coronary arteries) in cyanosis, II:979 Doppler ultrasonography for, II:1097, 1098 femoral (See Femoral artery) hepatic, in liver transplantation, III:2029 in Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2102–2103 mammary, II:927 pulmonary (See Pulmonary artery) temporal, inflammation of, V:3247–3249 thickening of, III:1695–1696 vertebrobasilar, V:3371 Arteriography, I:197 cerebral, V:3371–3372 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 for embolism, II:1170 kidney, IV:2618 for kidney transplantation, III:1921 renal (See Renal arteriography) Arteriosclerosis amputation from, I:157 aneurysmectomy with, I:193 angiography for, I:197 vs. atherosclerosis, I:393 bundle branch block from, I:614 cell therapy for, II:686 dizziness from, II:1095 flesh-eating disease with, II:1337 gangrene from, III:1393 from high cholesterol, III:1707 from hypertension, III:1720 macular degeneration from, III:2075 in men, III:2166 with nalidixic acid, V:3448 thyroid hormones and, V:3313 ultrasonography for, I:4 Arteriosclerotic retinopathy, IV:2889 Arteriovenous fistula, I:356–357 Arteriovenous malformations, I:357–359, 357 barbiturate-induced coma for, I:443 vs. cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3201 Arteritis, III:1901, 1902 Artery occlusion renal, IV:2855–2856 retinal, IV:2875–2876 Artery stenoses, renal. See Renal artery obstruction Arthralgia from acute kidney failure, I:44 from allergic purpura, I:110 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311–312 from APSGN, I:48 arthrography for, I:359 arthroplasty for, I:361 arthroscopy for, I:364 aspirin for, I:378 from bursitis, I:620 capsaicin for, IV:2460 with cat-scratch disease, II:670 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 paresthesia from, IV:2365 with polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2666 rehabilitation for, IV:2846 reiki for, IV:2848 in rheumatic fever, IV:2898 with rheumatic fever, IV:3223 rheumatoid (See Rheumatoid arthritis) from salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 with scoliosis, IV:2973 sexual dysfunctions from, IV:3016 sleep disorders with, IV:2997 from somatoform disorders, IV:3114 spinal, vs. fibromyalgia, II:1326 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1889 thallium heart scan and, V:3278 with ulcerative colitis, V:3430 urinary incontinence from, V:3453 from vasculitis, V:3478, 3479 with XLA, V:3585 from yersiniosis, V:3592 See also Osteoarthritis Arthritis Foundation, IV:2999 Arthrocentesis. See Synovial fluid analysis Arthrochalasia, II:1138 Arthrogram. See Arthrography Arthrography, I:359–361, 360 for rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 for TMJ, V:3249–3250 Arthroplasty, I:361–362, III:1890 hip replacement (See Hip replacement arthroplasty) for orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 Arthropod-borne virus. See Arboviruses Arthropoda. See Arthropods Arthropods arbovirus encephalitis from, I:347 bites and stings from (See Bites and stings) hemorrhagic fevers from, III:1590 Arthroscopic microdiscectomy. See Disk removal Arthroscopic surgery, I:362–364, 363f See also Arthroscopy Arthroscopy, I:364–367, 365f, III:1426 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 with MRI, III:2082 for rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 Articular capsule in dislocations and subluxations, II:1083 in juvenile arthritis, III:1892 in rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 Articular cartilage, II:795–796 Artificial breathing. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Artificial color, in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Artificial insemination, III:1829, 1832 Artificial joints, II:736 Artificial kidney. See Extracorporeal circuit Artificial larynx with head and neck cancer, III:1518 speech with, IV:3124 Artificial life support. See Life support Artificial limbs, IV:2410 for congenital amputation, II:887 in plastic surgery, IV:2620 staphylococcal infections from, IV:3157, 3159 Artificial pacemaker. See Pacemaker Artificial respiration. See Mechanical ventilation Artificial saliva. for Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3064 Artificial skin grafts, IV:3070 Artificial sweeteners pregnancy and, IV:2698 with sunscreens, IV:3221 Artificial tears for pinguecula and pterygium, IV:2602 for Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3064 AS. See Ankylosing spondylitis; Asperger syndrome Asanas. See Yoga Asava pepper. See Kava Asbestos, I:369 head and neck cancer from, III:1516, 1519 with kidney cancer, III:1909, 1911 laryngeal cancer from, III:1951 lung cancer from, III:2044, 2046, 2047, 2050 lung diseases from, III:2050 multiple myeloma from, III:2239 pleurisy from, IV:2631, 2632 pulmonary fibrosis from, III:1774, IV:2782 Asbestosis, I:369–371, 370, II:749 ASC. See Alterated states of consciousness Ascariasis, III:1589, IV:2923 Ascending colon. See Colon Ascending contrast phlebography. See Venography Ascites, I:371–373, 372 with alcoholism, I:97 with aldosteronism, I:101 from cholestasis, II:785 with liver biopsy, III:2017 from liver cancer, III:2020 paracentesis for, IV:2490 peritonitis from, IV:2556 PTHC and, IV:2532 from schistosomiasis, IV:2954 Ascitic fluid, I:372, IV:2490 Asclepias tuberosa. See Pleurisy root Ascorbic acid 3655 Ascorbic acid from chronic kidney failure, II:806 cryoglobulin test for, II:961 from decompression sickness, II:1009 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 from elephantiasis, II:1167 from fibromyalgia, II:1326, 1327 from food poisoning, II:1354, 1356 foot care with, II:1357 from gonorrhea, III:1474 from gout, III:1479 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 from impacted tooth removal, III:1799 joint biopsy for, III:1888 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 from kyphosis, III:1932 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 from Paget’s disease, IV:2456 from rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 rolfing for, IV:2912 from sulfonamides, IV:3217 from Sydenham’s chorea, IV:3223 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1889 from vasculitis, V:3479 Arthritis acetaminophen for, I:18 aging and, I:69 Alexander technique for, I:103 ambulatory electrocardiography with, III:1653 arthrography for, I:360–361 arthroscopic surgery for, I:363 aspirin for, I:378 bio-oxidative therapies for, IV:2451 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 bunions and, I:615 bursitis from, I:620 from campylobacteriosis, II:631 capsaicin for, IV:2460 with carpal tunnel syndrome, II:667 carpal tunnel syndrome with, II:667 with cold antibody hemolytic anemia, I:181 with Crohn’s disease, II:957 edema from, II:1135 vs. fifth disease, II:1328 from fractures, II:1365 from hepatitis B, III:1600 infectious (See Infectious arthritis) joint replacement for, III:1890 juvenile, III:1892–1894, V:3497 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 kyphosis from, III:1932 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2013 in men, III:2165 neuralgia from, IV:2339 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 vs. Paget’s disease, IV:2455 Ascorbic acid bilirubin levels from, III:2024 for scurvy, IV:2978 with triglycerides tests, V:3394 uric acid tests and, V:3442 See also Vitamin C ASD. See Acute stress disorder Aseptic meningitis from enteroviruses, II:1212 from poliovirus, IV:2648, 2649, 2650 Aseptic necrosis, bone. See Osteonecrosis ASHA. See American Speech-Language-Hearing Association Ashkenazi Jews Gaucher’s disease and, III:1412, 1413 Tay-Sachs disease and, V:3244 Ashtanga yoga, III:1514, V:3595 See also Yoga Asian diet, for high cholesterol, II:787 Asian ginseng. See Ginseng; Korean ginseng ASO. See Antistreptolysin O titer Asparaginase, V:3394 Aspartame, II:944 Aspartate aminotransferase, I:373 in cholestasis, II:785 for hepatitis C diagnosis, III:1604 with lactate dehydrogenase test, III:1941 liver disease and, I:88 liver function tests for, III:2024–2027 test, I:373–374 Aspartate transaminase. See Aspartate aminotransferase Aspartic acid, V:3514 Asperger syndrome, I:419, IV:2567–2569 Aspergilloma. See Pulmonary aspergillosis Aspergillosis, I:375–377, 376f allergic bronchopulmonary, I:107, 118, 375–377 cough from, II:941 hemoptysis from, III:1589 systemic antifungal drugs for, I:267 Aspergillus, I:375 with ABPA, I:107–108 bronchiectasis from, I:596 otitis externa from, IV:2431 Aspergillus flavus, I:375, I:376 Aspergillus fumigatus, I:107, 375 Aspheric lenses, II:1266 Asphyxia cyanosis from, II:980 fetal (See Perinatal asphyxia) from food poisoning, II:1355 in Munchausen syndrome, III:2257 from smoke inhalation, IV:3102 3656 Asphyxia neonatorum. See Perinatal asphyxia Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy, IV:2661 Asphyxiation. See Asphyxia Aspiration with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 for anaerobic infections, I:168 ARDS from, I:67 with arthrography, I:360 for bursitis, I:621 chest physical therapy and, II:745 for COPD, II:811 fine needle (See Fine needle aspiration) for fluke infection, II:1343 for hydroceles, III:1686 lung abscess from, III:2038–2039 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 with nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 with synovial fluid analysis, III:1889 with thyroid ultrasonography, V:3316 for thyroidectomy, V:3317 ultrasonic (See Ultrasonic aspiration) Aspiration biopsy, II:639 for anal cancer, I:170 of the breast, I:575 thyroid, V:3304–3305 for tumor removal, V:3416 Aspiration pneumonia after enteral nutrition, V:3402 from gastric lavage, IV:3169 histamine H2 antagonists for, I:314 from nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 from sclerotherapy, IV:2970 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 after stroke, IV:3197 from TEF, V:3351 from vocal cord paralysis, V:3530 Aspiration surgery. See Suction Aspirin, I:377–379 vs. acetaminophen, I:19 for acute lymphangitis, I:47 for acute mountain sickness, I:133 with alendronate, I:543–544 for altitude sickness, V:3562 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:138 anaphylaxis from, I:179 with antiangina agents, I:231 with anticonvulsants, I:255 as antiplatelet agent, I:250, 251 with antirheumatic drugs, I:307 ARDS from, I:67 for arthritis, IV:2898 for asbestosis, I:370 asthma from, I:380 for atherosclerosis, I:396 with Bence Jones protein test, I:464 for bites and stings, I:250, 251, 501 with bleeding time test, I:514 with blepharoplasty, I:519 for blood clots, I:408 bruises from, I:607 for burns, I:618 for bursitis, I:621 for cellulitis, II:685 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 with chemotherapy, II:742 with chickenpox, II:751 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for colposcopy, II:865 constipation from, II:906 before coronary stenting, II:934 deafness from, III:1528 for dental trauma, II:1029 digestive ulcers from, V:3432 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for dysmenorrhea, II:1117 for eclampsia/preeclampsia prevention, IV:2694 for endometriosis, II:1194 erythema multiforme from, II:1226 with eye muscle surgery, II:1269 with face lift, II:1275 for fever, II:1314, 1315 with fifth disease, II:1329 with gout drugs, III:1480 guaiac test strips and, II:1302, 1303 hair transplantation and, III:1500 for headache, III:1524 hearing loss from, III:1528 for heart attack prevention, III:1535 for heart attacks, III:1533 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 indigestion from, III:1813 with infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 for influenza, III:1835 for ischemia prevention, III:1871 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 kidney damage from, IV:2337, 2338 for lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1939 lactate dehydrogenase levels and, III:1939 with liver biopsy, III:2017 for low back pain, III:2032 with measles, III:2139 for migraines, III:2188 for miscarriage prevention, IV:2837 for mumps, III:2256 nasal polyps from, IV:2316 with nicotinic acid, III:1708 with NSAIDs, I:175 with opioid analgesics, I:177 for osteoarthritis, IV:2999 overdose, acidosis from, III:2179 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for speech disorders, IV:3124 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 for visual impairment, V:3510 Associative aphasia. See Conduction aphasia AST. See Aspartate aminotransferase Astelin. See Azelastin Astemizole for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:119 with erythromycins, II:1233 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 Asterixis, III:2023 Asthenopia from eyeglasses, II:1267 from hyperopia, III:1712 neuralgia from, IV:2340 from phototherapy, IV:2590, 2979 Asthma, I:115, 116, 118, 121–122, I:379–384, 382f with ABPA, I:107 from air pollution, III:2050 Alexander technique, I:103 from allergy tests, I:123 with anti-insomnia agents, I:283 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 with aspirin, I:379 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 with barbiturates, I:446 with benzodiazepines, I:467 blood transfusions and, V:3367 breathing capacity and, III:1999 bronchodilators for, I:119–120, 600 with chest physical therapy, II:745 in children, II:762 cholinergic agents with, II:794 cough from, II:941 with cough suppressants, II:943, 944 dermatitis from, II:1037 with diuretics, II:1089 drugs for, I:236–238 dyspnea from, IV:3035 from foreign objects, II:1358 gas embolism and, III:1397 with guaifenesin, II:1254 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214, 2215 with methadone, III:2182 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 from obesity, IV:2374 occupational, IV:2386–2388, IV:2386t with opioid analgesics, I:177 with penicillins, IV:2528 pneumothorax from, IV:2641 in pregnancy, III:1632, 1633 with pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 reiki for, IV:2848 smoke inhalation and, IV:3103 from smoking, IV:3104 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with sulfonamides, IV:3217 tests for, I:123, IV:2783 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 Asthma weed. See Lobelia Asthmatic attack. See Asthma Asthmatic response. See Asthma Astigmatic dial, I:385 Astigmatism, I:384–386, 385f from albinism, I:90 eyeglasses and contact lenses for, II:1265, 1267 from eyelid diseases, II:1273 nystagmus from, IV:2372 from pterygium, IV:2602 Aston, Judith, I:387 Aston Paradigm Corporation, I:387 Aston patterning, I:386–387, II:924, III:2225 Astragalus membranaceus. See Milk vetch Astringents aromatherapy as, I:348, 349 for hemorrhoids, I:275 with rosacea, IV:2918 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 Astrocytes, IV:2720 Astrocytomas, I:570 Astroviruses, III:1408 Asymmetric hypertrophy, IV:2932 Asymmetrical fetal growth retardation. See Fetal growth retardation Asymmetrical septal hypertrophy. See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Atacand. See Candesartan Atarax. See Hydroxyzine Ataxia in ataxia-telangiectasia, I:388 from cerebellar damage, III:2222 in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 electromyography for, II:1160 Friedreich’s (See Friedreich’s ataxia) with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495–1496 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 movement disorders from, III:2221 in Wernicke’s syndrome, III:1930, 1931 Ataxia telangiectasia, I:387–389, III:1789 ATD. See Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy Atelectasis, I:389–391, 390 from appendectomy, I:340 from asbestosis, I:370 chest drainage therapy for, II:743 with chest physical therapy, II:745 CPAP for, III:1837 with lung biopsy, III:2042 from pleurisy, IV:2631 surgery for, III:2053 from thoracic surgery, V:3289 3657 Atelectasis for pain, IV:2460, 2462 for palliative cancer therapy, II:642 for paresthesia, IV:2366 with partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507 for pericarditis, IV:2539 with plastic surgery, IV:2621 platelet aggregation test and, IV:2623 platelet function disorders from, IV:2626 poisoning, blood gas analysis for, I:527 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 with protein electrophoresis, IV:2747 for pseudoxanthoma elasticum, IV:2754 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 Reye’s syndrome and, III:2026, IV:2895–2896 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for sciatica, IV:2964 for secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 with skin biopsy, IV:3065 with small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 for sore throats, IV:3119 for spinal stenosis, IV:3136 for sunburn, IV:3218 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for tendinitis, V:3251 for tension headache, V:3255 for thrombocytosis, V:3298 with thrombolytic therapy, IV:3196, 3198, V:3300 for thyroiditis, V:3319 for TIA, V:3372 with tinnitus, V:3322 for TMJ, V:3250 tooth extraction and, V:3332 for toothache, V:3337 for trichinosis, V:3386 uric acid tests and, V:3442 for vascular dementia, II:1025 for vasectomy, V:3482 Aspirin Free Anacin. See Acetaminophen Aspirin Free Excedrin. See Acetaminophen Aspirin-sodium bicarbonate, I:378 Ass ear. See Comfrey Assault, head injuries from, III:1519 Assisted suicide. See Euthanasia Assistive technology devices ambulatory (See Ambulation aids) for elderly, IV:2999, 3000 for low back pain, III:2032 for macular degeneration, III:2077 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 Atenolol See also Pneumothorax Atenolol, I:475 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 with antimalarials, I:288 with antimigraine agents, I:291 for anxiety, I:321 with bronchodilators, I:602 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 with decongestants, II:1012 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypertension, I:279–281 for phobias, IV:2583 Atherectomy, I:391–393, 392 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for heart diseases, III:1534 for ischemia, III:1870 Atherosclerosis, I:393–398, 395f aneurysmectomy with, I:193 angina pectoris from, I:194, 196 angioplasty for, I:200 aortic aneurysm from, I:325, 326 cerebral aneurysm from, II:698 coronary heart disease from, II:929, 934 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 echocardiography for, II:1129 endarterectomy for, II:1180 frostbite and, II:1370 heart attacks from, III:1532, 1536 from high cholesterol, II:786, III:1707 from hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 impotence from, III:1804 lipoproteins test for, III:2007 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2551 peripheral vascular disease from, IV:2555 from pseudoxanthoma elasticum, IV:2754 renal artery occlusion from, IV:2856 renal artery stenosis from, IV:2856, 2857 retinal artery occlusion from, IV:2875 sildenafil citrate and, IV:3051, 3052 from smoking, IV:3104 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3202 tests for, II:792–794 with TIA, V:3371 of vein grafts, II:928 vitamin E and, V:3518–3519 Atherosclerotic plaque ischemia from, III:1868, 1871 in renal artery stenosis, IV:2856 Atherosclerotic renovascular hypertension. See Renovascular hypertension Athetoid CP. See Cerebral palsy Athetosis, II:704, III:2222 3658 Athletes with amenorrhea, I:146 arthroscopic surgery for, I:363 with heel spurs, III:1562 with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 Korean ginseng for, III:1456 with oligomenorrhea, IV:2388, 2389 radial keratotomy for, IV:2804 Athlete’s foot, I:398–400, 398, 399 acute lymphangitis from, I:47 antifungal drugs for, I:270 foot care with, II:1357 skin lesions from, IV:3076 Athletic heart muscle disease. See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Athletic heart syndrome, I:400 Athletic injuries. See Sports injuries Athletic training heat treatment for, III:1559 heel spurs from, III:1562 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388, 2389 Ativan. See Lorazepam Atkins, Robert, I:400–402, 401 Atkins Center for Complementary Medicine, I:401 Atkins diet, I:400–403 ATM, in ataxia-telangiectasia, I:388 Atmospheric pressure, IV:2592 Atomic bomb, IV:2807 Atomic radiation. See Ionizing radiation Atopa belladonna. See Belladonna Atopic dermatitis, I:115, 116, I:403–406, 403, 404f, II:1037 with asthma, I:381 itching from, III:1874 lichenification from, IV:3075 ultraviolet light treatment for, V:3435 Atopy, in asthma, I:380 Atorvastatin, for high cholesterol, II:787, 789 Atovaquone, IV:2636 ATP7B gene, V:3567 Atretol. See Carbamazepine Atrial ectopic beats, I:406 Atrial extrasystole. See Atrial ectopic beats Atrial fibrillation, I:407–409 from atrial ectopic beats, I:406 from atrial septal defects, I:409 catheter ablation for, II:679 electric countershock for, II:665 electrocardiography for, II:1148 from heart biopsy, III:2287 from mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206 in mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 from sick sinus syndrome, IV:3040 from tensilon test, V:3254 ventricular fibrillation from, V:3499 Atrial flutter, I:407–409 carotid sinus massage for, II:666–667 catheter ablation for, II:679 electric countershock for, II:665 Atrial premature complexes. See Atrial ectopic beats Atrial pressure, IV:2777 Atrial septal defects, I:409–410, II:900 from Down syndrome, II:1099 surgery for, III:1543 Atrial tachycardia carotid sinus massage for, II:666–667 vs. ventricular tachycardia, V:3503 Atrioventricular canal defects, III:1543 Atrioventricular node, II:1163 Atrium. See Heart atrium Atromid-S. See Clofibrate Atropa belladonna. See Belladonna Atrophic gastritis. See Gastritis Atrophic macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration Atrophic rhinitis, IV:3099 Atrophy from beriberi, I:469 from congenital amputation, II:887 from immobilization, III:1782 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 neurologic examination for, IV:2352 of parietal cells, IV:2557 from reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2840 from skin lesions, IV:3075 Atropine for asthma, I:120, 382 for carbamate poisoning, III:1842 constipation from, II:906 delirium from, II:1021 for heart attacks, III:1534 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 overdose, II:1104 for Parkinson disease, I:296 Atrovent. See Ipratropium; Ipratropium bromide Attapulgite, for diarrhea, I:264–265 Attention assesment, IV:2351 Attention deficit disorder. See Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, I:410–414 biofeedback for, I:482 vs. bipolar disorder, I:487 in children, II:762 CNS stimulants for, II:691 cognitive therapy for, II:840, 841 conduct disorder from, II:883, 884 vs. learning disorders, III:1969 from Marfan syndrome, III:2114 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Autism, I:417–421, 419, IV:2567–2569 in children, II:762, 764, 765 electroencephalography for, II:1151 from fragile X syndrome, II:1368 music therapy for, III:2271 vs. mutism, III:2272 from peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 pet therapy for, IV:2571 pica from, IV:2595 from rubella, V:3339 Autistic disorder. See Autism Autistic savants. See Savant syndrome Autistic spectrum disorder. See Autism Autoantibodies antinuclear antibody test for, I:294 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 with hyperthyroidism, III:1724 in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 myocardium and, I:291 in Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 Autoclave, for piercing and tattoos, IV:2599 Autogenetic grafts. See Autografts Autogenic training therapy, IV:3189 Autografts, I:544 for acute leukemia, III:1988 vs. allografts, I:544 in breast reconstruction, I:587 for burns, I:619 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for lymphomas, III:2094 for skin grafts, IV:3070 Autoimmune diseases, I:422–425, I:422–425 in achalasia, I:20 Addison’s disease from, I:53 alopecia from, I:126 anemia from, II:915 antinuclear antibody test for, I:294–295 from breast implants, I:586, 589 celiac disease, II:681 with cholangitis, II:774 with complement deficiencies, II:874 cryoglobulin test for, II:961 from cutis laxa, II:978 with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 discoid lupus erythematosus as, II:1080 ESR and, II:1231 Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475–1476 graft vs. host disease as, III:1481 hemolytic anemia from, III:1579 in hepatitis, III:1599 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 hypothyroidism and, III:1756 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795, 1796 juvenile arthritis as, III:1893 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 laser eye surgery and, IV:2586 with lymphomas, III:2092 MALT lymphomas as, III:2108 in multiple sclerosis, III:2249–2250 myelofibrosis and, III:2282 neutropenia from, IV:2354 pernicious anemia and, IV:2558 plasmapheresis for, IV:2618–2620 polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2662–2663 premature menopause from, IV:2702 primary biliary cirrhosis as, IV:2717 psoriatic arthritis as, IV:2759 psychosis from, IV:2766 pulmonary fibrosis from, IV:2782 rash from, IV:2820–2821 renal tubular acidosis and, IV:2858 rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2899–2903 scleroderma, IV:2965–2969 with septic shock, IV:3005 with silicosis, IV:3055 Sjögren’s syndrome with, IV:3063 spinal stenosis from, IV:3136 vitiligo as, V:3527 vitiligo from, IV:3078 Wegener’s granulomatosis as, V:3552 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, I:422, 423, 424, II:915 Autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 antinuclear antibody test for, I:294 protein components test for, IV:2746 Autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura. See Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Autoimmune thyroiditis, I:422, 423, 425, V:3318, 3319, 3320 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 hypoparathyroidism from, III:1744 hypothyroidism from, III:1756 Autologous blood donation, I:525, 526 Autologous blood transfusion, V:3367 Autologous bone marrow transplantation, I:550–552 Autologous cell therapy. See Cell therapy Autolytic debridement. See Debridement Automated refracting devices, II:1263 Automatic cardioverter. See Implantable defibrillators Automatic implantable cardioverterdefibrillator. See Implantable defibrillators Automatic pathways, IV:2550 Automobile accidents. See Traffic accidents 3659 Automatic pathways oppositional defiant disorder from, IV:2396, 2397 PET scan for, IV:2677 from subdural hematoma, IV:3205 substance abuse and, IV:3206, 3211 from Tourette syndrome, V:3341, 3342, 3343, 3344 Attention disorders. See Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Attention-seeking, III:1764–1765 Atypical adenomatous hyperplasia. See Endometrial hyperplasia Atypical antidepressants, I:256, 259 Atypical antipsychotic agents, I:301–303 Atypical antipsychotics. See Antipsychotic agents Atypical ductal hyperplasia, II:1324 Atypical mycobacterium infections, III:2276–2277 Atypical pneumonia. See Mycoplasma pneumonia Audiogram. See Audiometry Audiology, I:414 Audiometry, I:414–415, 414 for acoustic neuroma, I:29 for hearing loss, III:1529 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 Auditory brainstem response test, I:29 Auditory evoked potentials brain stem (See Brain stem auditory evoked potentials) for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 Auditory hallucinations, IV:2958 Auditory integration training, I:415–417 Auditory nerve, II:837 Auditory ossicles. See Ear ossicles Augmentation therapy, II:811 Augmentin. See Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid Aura, in hallucinations, III:1504 Auranofin. for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 Auricular acupuncture. See Auriculotherapy Auriculotherapy, I:41 Aurolate. See Gold sodium thiomalate Aurothioglucose, for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 Aurum, for syphilis, I:323 Auscultation for atelectasis, I:390 for empyema, II:1176 during physical examination, IV:2593 for pneumothorax, IV:2642 for ventricular septal defect, V:3501 Australian gum. See Eucalyptus Authentic movement, III:2225 Autonomic dysreflexia Automotive emissions. See Vehicle emissions Autonomic dysreflexia, IV:3131–3132 Autonomic functions, IV:3129–3130, 3131 Autonomic hyperreflexia. See Autonomic dysreflexia Autonomic nerve block, IV:2459, 2460 Autonomic nervous system anxiety and, I:318 guided imagery and, III:1490 in therapeutic touch, V:3282 Autonomic neuropathy, II:1057 with dicyclomine, I:309 dizziness from, II:1094 Autonomy, in anorexia nervosa, I:212 AutoPap QC, IV:2486 Autopsy, I:425–427 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:135, 137 for cause of death, II:1006 for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 for nocardiosis diagnosis, IV:2358 Autoradiograms, III:1432, 1433 Autosomal dominant cutis laxa. See Cutis laxa Autosomal dominant inheritance. See Dominant inheritance Autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2880–2881 Autosomal recessive inheritance. See Recessive inheritance Autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2880–2881 Autosome abnormalities. See Chromosome abnormalities Autosuggestion therapy, IV:3189 Autotransplantation. See Autografts Avapro. See Irbesartan Aveeno. See Oatmeal Avelox. See Moxifloxacin Avena sativa. See Rolled oats Aventis-Pasteur, V:3265 Aventyl. See Nortriptyline Aversion therapy, IV:3018 Avian schistosomiasis, IV:2954 Aviation medicine, I:427–428 Avicenna, I:348 Avitaminosis from alcoholism, I:92 dehydration from, II:1017 delirium from, II:1020 head and neck cancer from, III:1516 hemolytic anemia from, III:1579 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 in malnutrition, III:2104 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 from starvation, IV:3161 vitamin tests for, V:3520 3660 AVMs. See Arteriovenous malformations Avobenzone, for sun exposure, IV:3220 Avoidance from child abuse, II:754 from PTSD, IV:2686 Avoidant personality disorder, IV:2564–2567 Avulsions. See Wounds Axial myopia. See Myopia Axid. See Nizatidine Axilla with mastectomy, III:2129 physical examination of, IV:2594 Axillary node dissection with lumpectomy, III:2037 with mastectomy, III:2129 Axonal degradation. See Retrograde degeneration Axons, in head injuries, III:1522 Aygestin. See Norethindrone acetate; Progestins Ayurveda. See Bayberry Ayurvedic medicine, I:428–432, 430t aging and, I:71 aromatic plants and, I:348 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for common cold, II:872 for corns and calluses, II:924 for gastritis, III:1407 for measles, III:2140 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for stings, I:503 for strep throat, IV:3179 for stress reduction, IV:3189 Azarcon, lead poisoning from, III:1965 Azatadine, for allergies, I:278 Azathioprine with allopurinol, III:1798 for autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 for Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 cholestasis from, II:784 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 in immunosuppressive therapy, III:1796 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for kidney transplantation, III:1922 for liver transplantation, III:2029 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252, 2253 for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for polymyositis, IV:2667 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 with red blood cell indices, IV:2837 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2855 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305–306, IV:2901 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 Azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine. See Azathioprine Azelaic acid for acne, I:25 for rosacea, IV:2918 Azelastin for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:278 Azelex. See Azelaic acid Azidothymidine. See Zidovudine Azithromycin, I:241, 242, II:1232 for chlamydia with gonorrhea, III:1473 after rape, IV:2819 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 for syphilis, IV:3229 for trachoma, V:3356 for trench fever, V:3384 Azmacort. See Triamcinolone acetonide Azotemia with ascites, I:372 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 from pentamidine isoethionate, IV:2636 AZT. See Zidovudine Azula carate. See Pinta Azulfidine. See Sulfasalazine B B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia, I:102–103 B-CLL. See B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia B lymphocyte deficiency, III:1785, 1787 B lymphocytes in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 in chronic leukemia, III:1990–1991 in common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 in hairy cell leukemia, III:1501 in infectious mononucleosis, III:1823 in lymphocytopenia, III:2070 in lymphomas, III:2092 normal levels of, III:2068 plasma cells and, III:2238 tests for, III:2067–2068 B-mode ultrasonography, I:4, II:1258–1259 B-ring. See Lower esophageal ring B2M. See Beta2-microglobulin Babesia microti, I:433 Babesiosis, I:433–434, I:526 Babies. See Infants Babinski reflex, III:2023 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 septic shock from, IV:3004 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 See also Sepsis Bacteria aerobic (See Aerobic bacteria) anaerobic (See Anaerobic bacteria) b lymphocytes and, III:2092 bronchiectasis from, I:596 diarrhea from, I:264 empyema from, II:1175 jaundice from, III:1882 kidney function tests for, III:1912 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 occupational asthma from, IV:2386 ophthalmic antibiotics and, I:243 stool culture for, IV:3171 in tooth decay, IV:2405 topical antibiotics and, I:244 urinalysis for, V:3447 vaccination for, V:3465 Bacterial conjunctivitis, II:903 Bacterial culture from chest drainage therapy, II:744 for clenched fist injury, II:821 for erysipelas, II:1225 for gonorrhea, III:1472, 1473 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for labyrinthitis, III:1935 for mastoiditis, III:2134 for melioidosis, III:2150 for meningococcemia, III:2158 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 before nail removal, IV:2309 for nephritis, IV:2334 for nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for pleural effusion, IV:2629 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for prostatitis, IV:2740 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2751 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for sepsis, IV:3004 for skin infections, IV:3068 for sore throats, IV:3118 of sputum, IV:3148 urine culture for, V:3456–3457 for vibriosis, V:3507 for wounds, V:3578 Bacterial diseases. See Bacterial infections Bacterial endocarditis from pulmonary valve insufficiency, IV:2787 vs. rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Bacterial folliculitis. See Folliculitis GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Bacterial gastroenteritis. See Gastroenteritis Bacterial infections abscess drainage for, I:15 acne from, I:226 with AIDS, I:77 allergic purpura from, I:110 aminoglycosides for, I:150–151 anaerobic, I:167–168 from animal bites, I:206–208 antibiotics for, I:240–242 aortic aneurysm from, I:325 appendicitis, I:341 ARDS from, I:67 atelectasis from, I:390 balanitis from, I:439–440 Bartholin’s gland abscess from, I:450 of bile ducts, II:773 blepharitis from, II:1271 of blood stream, I:435 after childbirth, IV:2773–2774 cholecystitis from, II:779 with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 with chronic leukemia, III:1991 CNS (See Central nervous system infections) with common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 with complement deficiencies, II:874 conjunctivitis from, II:903 corneal ulcers from, II:921–922 from craniotomy, II:947 cyclic vomiting syndrome from, II:980 debridement for, II:1007 dehydration from, II:1017 from diabetes, II:1053 diarrhea from, II:1066 dyspepsia from, II:1118 encephalitis from, II:1177 vs. enterobiasis, II:1208 epididymitis from, II:1219 erythema nodosum, II:1227 erythromycins for, II:1231 of the eye, I:243 vs. facial paralysis, I:461, 462 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 flushing of, V:3580 foot care with, II:1357 from gallstones, II:779 with heart transplantation, III:1546, 1547, 1548 from heart valve replacement, III:1552 hemolytic uremic syndrome from, III:1580–1581 hemoptysis from, III:1589 hospital acquired, III:1674–1675 with hypokalemia, III:1739 hypothermia from, III:1754 infection control for, III:1821–1823 3661 Bacterial infections Baby bottle tooth decay. See Bottle mouth caries Baby food. See Infant food Babysitters, in child abuse, II:756 Bach, Edward, II:1338, 1339, 1340, 1341 Bach center, II:1341 Bach flower remedies. See Flower remedies Bach Foundation, II:1341 Bach International Education Program, II:1341 Bachelor’s buttons. See Feverfew Bacillary angiomatosis, I:434–435 vs. bartonellosis, I:451 from lice, III:1994 Bacillary dysentery. See Shigellosis Bacille Calmette-Guerin vaccine. See BCG vaccine Bacillus anthracis, I:223 Bacillus Calmette Guérin vaccine, V:3410 Bacitracin for conjunctivitis, II:903–904 for folliculitis, II:1351 for injuries, I:244 kidney damage from, IV:2337 Back, physical examination of, IV:2593 Back pain Alexander technique for, I:103 disk removal for, II:1081 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1144 with female genital mutilation, II:1307 low (See Low back pain) from osteomyelitis, IV:2420 osteopathy for, IV:2422 Back surgery vs. chemonucleolysis, II:739 for disk removal (See Disk removal) Backaches. See Back pain Baclofen for cerebral palsy, II:705 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 as muscle relaxant, III:2259 for torticollis, V:3341 Bacteremia, I:435–437 blood culture for, I:522 from cellulitis, II:684 from dog bites, I:498 endocarditis from, II:1183 from endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1199 from ERCP, II:1197 from erysipelas, II:1225 with mycobacterial infections, III:2276 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 from nephritis, IV:2334 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 Bacterial infections joint biopsy for, III:1888 labyrinthitis from, III:1935 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 from leishmaniasis, III:1975 from lice, III:1994 with liver transplantation, III:2030 lung abscess from, III:2038–2039 lymphadenitis from, III:2064–2065 lymphocyte tests for, III:2068 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 mastitis from, III:2131 with measles, III:2139, 2140 mycetoma from, III:2275 myocarditis from, III:2289 nail removal for, IV:2309 nasal irrigation for, IV:2312 necrotizing enterocolitis as, IV:2328 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 neutropenia from, IV:2354 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 penicillin for, IV:2527 from perforated eardrum, IV:2534 pericarditis from, IV:2538 perinatal, IV:2540–2543 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552 peritonitis from, IV:2556 from plasmapheresis, IV:2619 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 from shingles, IV:3032 skin culture for, IV:3068 skin ulcer from, IV:3076 from smallpox, IV:3096–3097 with splenectomy, IV:3140 sputum culture for, IV:3148 sulfonamides for, IV:3215–3216 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1890 of tear ducts, II:1003 of the throat, IV:3118 topical antibiotics for, I:244 with tracheotomy, V:3353 travelers diarrhea from, V:3378 urinalysis for, V:3446, 3447 from urinary catheterization, V:3450 from ventricular shunts, V:3503 from vesicoureteral reflux, V:3505 vitamin K and, V:3519 vulvovaginitis from, V:3539–3540 WBC count and differential for, V:3556 Whipple’s disease from, III:2086 from wounds, V:3583 with XLA, V:3585 Bacterial keratitis. See Keratitis Bacterial meningitis, III:2153, 2154, 2156 from brucellosis, I:606 from orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2408 Bacterial pneumonia. See Pneumonia Bacterial purulent pericarditis, IV:2538 Bacterial toxins 3662 antibiotic-associated colitis from, I:238–239 Kawasaki syndrome from, III:1901 Bacterial tracheitis, II:960 Bacterial vaginosis lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 PID and, IV:2522 Bacterial vulvovaginitis. See Vulvovaginitis Bacteroides anaerobic infections from, I:167 in clenched fist injury, II:821 cultures for, V:3579 empyema from, II:1176 mastoiditis from, III:2134 Bacteroides fragilis, I:167 Bactrim. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole Bactroban. See Bacitracin Bad breath, I:437 from chronic kidney failure, II:806 from esophageal diverticulum, II:1244 from periodontal diseases, IV:2547 from poisoning, IV:2644 with stomatitis, IV:3170 Bagassosis, III:1717 Baghdad sore. See Cutaneous leishmaniasis Bai gou. See Ginkgo Baker’s yeast, V:3465 Baking soda. See Sodium bicarbonate BAL. See Dimercaprol Balance. See Equilibrium Balance and coordination tests, I:438–439, 438 Balance disorders from acoustic neuroma, I:27–30 from conversion disorder, IV:3114 from dizziness, II:1094, 1095 from electric brain stimulation, II:1146 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 from hammertoe, III:1505 from inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 from labyrinthitis, III:1935–1936 motion sickness, III:2218 from mycobacterial infections, III:2277 with paralysis, IV:2492 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 Balanced anesthesia, I:186 Balanitis, I:439–440 Balanoposthitis. See Balanitis Balantidiasis, I:440–442 Balantidium coli, I:440–441 Balder’s eyelashes. See Chamomile Baldness. See Alopecia Bali goli, lead poisoning from, III:1965 Ballism, III:2222 Balloon angioplasty, I:201, I:201–203 for angina pectoris, I:195 for aortic valve stenosis, I:330 with atherectomy, I:391 coronary stent after, II:934 for renal artery stenosis, IV:2857 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 ventricular assist devices after, V:3498 Balloon atrial septostomy, II:902, III:1543 Balloon catheterization. See Balloon dilatation Balloon dilatation, I:442–443, III:1543 for achalasia, I:20 with cardiac catheterization, II:655 for congenital heart disease, II:902 for duodenal obstruction, II:1111 Foley (See Foley catheterization) for heart valve repair, III:1549–1550 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 for prostatitis, IV:2741 for pulmonary valve stenosis, IV:2788 Balloon dilation. See Balloon dilatation Balloon valvuloplasty. See Balloon dilatation Balm, for IBS, III:1867 Balneotherapy. See Therapeutic baths Bamboo spine. See Ankylosing spondylitis Bananas, for heartburn, III:1555 Bandages elastic (See Elastic bandages) for tinea, IV:2908 for wounds, III:1937, V:3582 Bandler, Richard, IV:2369 Barb coma. See Barbiturates, coma induced with Barbados let. See Elephantiasis Barberry bushes, IV:3144 Barbiturates, I:445–447 abuse of, III:1416, IV:3207 ammonia levels from, III:2024 with anticonvulsants, I:255 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with antimigraine agents, I:289 for anxiety, I:320 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 with benzodiazepines, I:469 for catatonia, II:676 for central nervous system depression, II:689 coma induced with, I:443–444 with creatinine test, II:949 delirium from, II:1021 with general anesthetics, I:187–188, 189 with hydroxyzine, I:285 for insomnia, I:282, 284 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 trench fever from, V:3384 Bartonella quintana bacillary angiomatosis from, I:434 trench fever from, V:3384 Bartonellosis, I:451–453 Bartter’s syndrome aldosterone test for, I:101 hypokalemia from, III:1740 Basal cell cancer cryotherapy for, II:962 ear surgery for, II:1124 Basal cell carcinoma anal cancer from, I:170 non-melanoma skin cancer as, IV:3066–3068 Basal ganglia in cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 in movement disorders, III:2221–2223, 2224 PSP and, IV:2722 torticollis and, V:3340 Basal gastric secretion test, III:1400, 1403 BASC. See Behavioral Assessment System for Children Baseball finger. See Mallet finger Basedow’s disease. See Graves’ disease Basiliximab, for immunosuppression, III:1796 Basketball, concussion from, III:2135 Basophils in complete blood count, I:522 WBC count and differential for, V:3556, 3557 Bastyr University AIDS Research Study, III:1899–1900 Bath oils, for psoriasis, IV:2757 Bathing. See Hygiene; Therapeutic baths Bats, histoplasmosis from, III:1639 Battacca bats, in Gestalt therapy, III:1446 Battered child syndrome, I:452–453 Battle Creek Food Company, V:3485 Battle fatigue. See Post-traumatic stress disorder Battle’s sign, I:608 Bayberry for sore throats, IV:3120 for strep throat, IV:3179 Baycol. See Cerivastatin; Cervastatin Bayer Select Maximum Strength Headache Pain Relief Formula. See Acetaminophen Bayley Scale of Infant Development, III:2175 Bayou virus, III:1508 Baysean analysis, for retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2880 BB. See Creatine kinase GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 BCG vaccine for bladder cancer, I:508 for leprosy, III:1979 TB tests and, V:3404 for tuberculosis, V:3410 BDI. See Beck Depression Inventory Beans, vitamin B6 in, V:3513 Bearberry for cystitis, II:994 for urethritis, V:3441 Bear’s grape. See Bearberry Bechterew’s disease. See Ankylosing spondylitis Beck, Aaron, II:840 Beck Depression Inventory, II:1034 for binge eating disorder, I:481 for sleep disorders, IV:3090 Becker muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267, 2295, 2296 Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, V:3564 Beclomethasone dipropionate, for asthma, I:601 Beclovent. See Beclomethasone dipropionate BED. See Binge eating disorder Bed rest for ascites, I:372 blood clots from, III:1800 constipation from, II:906 decubitus ulcer from, I:457 for deep vein thrombosis, II:1014 after disk removal, II:1082 embolism from, II:1169 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for glomerulonephritis, III:1462 for herniated disk, III:1629 for ileus, III:1780 for infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 for influenza, III:1834 for miscarriage prevention, III:2205 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for placenta previa, IV:2611 for prematurity prevention, IV:2708 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for rubella, IV:2927 for sciatica, IV:2964 for thyroiditis, V:3320 Bed-wetting, I:453–456 polysomnography for, IV:2668 tricyclic antidepressants for, I:258 Bedding, sudden infant death syndrome and, IV:3215 Bedsores. See Decubitus ulcer Bedwetting. See Bed-wetting Bee balm. See Lemon balm Bee bread. See Red clover Bee pollen, for allergic rhinitis, I:113 Bee venoms, for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 3663 Bee venoms with regional anesthetics, I:191 for Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 serum sickness from, IV:3008 for tetanus, V:3265 with thiamine, I:470 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 withdrawal from, V:3572, 3573 Bare lymphocyte syndrome. See Severe combined immunodeficiency disease Bariatric surgery. See Surgical stapling Barium with adrenal gland scan, I:61 in hypotonic duodenography (See Hypotonic duodenography) stool fats and, IV:3173 Barium enema, I:447–449 for bowel preparation, I:563 for colon cancer, II:851 for constipation, II:906 for Crohn’s disease, II:958 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 vs. GI bleeding studies, III:1449 for Hirschsprung’s disease, III:1635 for ileus, III:1779–1780 for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 for intussusception, III:1856 for iron deficiency anemia, III:1861 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 for rectal polyps, IV:2834 for rectal prolapse, IV:2835 Barium meal. See Upper GI series Barium sulfate in CAT scan, II:876 in upper GI series, V:3438 Barium swallow, V:3438–3439 for dyspepsia, II:1119 for esophageal cancer, II:1240, 1241 for gastroesophageal reflux, III:1554 for laryngeal cancer, III:1951 for lower esophageal ring, III:2034–2035 Barlow method, II:892 Barlow’s syndrome. See Mitral valve prolapse Barotrauma, III:1840 Barrett esophagus, II:1239, 1240, III:1553 Barrett’s esophagus. See Barrett esophagus Barrier contraceptives, II:911 condoms as (See Condoms) for PID prevention, IV:2524 Barrier creams, for contact dermititis, II:909, 910 Bartenieff, Irmgard, III:2225 Bartenieff fundamentals, III:2225 Bartholin’s gland cyst, I:449–451 Bartonella henselae cat-scratch disease from, I:207, 434, 498, II:669–670 Beef Beechdrops. See Blue cohosh Beef, tapeworm infections in, V:3239 Beepen-VK. See Penicillin V Beer, hyponatremia from, III:1743 Beer potomania, IV:2449 Bees hives from, III:1642 stings from (See Bites and stings) Beetles, grain infections from, V:3240 Beggar’s blanket. See Mullein Behavior assesment, IV:2351 Behavior disorders from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 from benzodiazepines, I:467 from dementia, II:1025 from lead poisoning, III:1965 from neonatal jaundice, IV:2330 from nicotine, II:883 from oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2396–2398 from overhydration, IV:2449 from postconcussion syndrome, III:1521 Behavior modification for ADHD, I:412 for bed-wetting, I:455 for bladder control, I:511–512 for bruxism, I:609 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 for conduct disorder, II:884 for impulse control disorders, III:1808 for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 for mutism, III:2272 for nose picking, IV:2314 for obesity, IV:2374 for oppositional defiant disorder, II:885, IV:2397 for paraphilias, IV:3019 Behavior therapy for autism, I:420 for children, II:764 for cocaine addiction, II:833 for psychosocial disorders, IV:2768 for self mutilation, IV:2994 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3016 for sleep apnea, IV:3085 for stress reduction, IV:3189 for substance abuse, IV:3210 Behavioral Assessment System for Children, II:883, IV:2396 Behcet’s syndrome, I:459–460 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 uveitis from, V:3461 Behind-the-ear hearing aids, III:1525 Bejel, I:460–461 Belesh. See Bejel Belladonna for carbuncle, I:537 for conjunctivitis, II:904 constipation from, II:906 3664 for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 for furunculosis, I:537 for laryngitis, III:1958 for mumps, III:2256 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for otitis media, IV:2435 overdose, II:1104 for rubella, IV:2927 for sore throats, IV:3120 for spasms, I:308 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Bellis perennis, III:2033 Bell’s palsy. See Facial paralysis BeLPT. See Beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test Bemote. See Dicyclomine Benadryl. See Diphenhydramine Benazepril with diuretics, II:1090 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypertension, I:203, 279–281 with penicillins, IV:2529 Bence Jones proteins in multiple myeloma, III:2238, 2240, 2241 protein electrophoresis and, IV:2747 test for, I:463–464 in Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3544 Bender, Lauretta, I:465 Bender-Gestalt test, I:464–466 Bender Visual Motor Gestalt test. See Bender-Gestalt test Benemid. See Probenecid Benign paroxysmal peritonitis. See Familial Mediterranean fever Benign prostatic hyperplasia. See Benign prostatic hypertrophy Benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1201–1204, III:2166 acute kidney failure from, I:44 alpha1-adrenergic blockers for, I:129 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 with antihistamines, I:278 bladder stones from, I:510, 511 with bronchodilators, I:602 cystoscopy for, II:996 with decongestants, II:1011 with dicyclomine, I:309 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 hydronephrosis from, III:1689 intravenous urography for, III:1855 laser surgery for, III:1960 with methadone, III:2182 with motion sickness, III:2219 with opioid analgesics, I:177 prostate biopsy for, IV:2727 vs. prostate cancer, IV:2730, 2731 prostate ultrasound for, IV:2736–2737 prostatectomy for, IV:2737–2739 PSA test for, IV:2735 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 Benign tumors, II:632 brain (See Brain tumors) breast, II:1325 vs. cancer, I:246 heart, III:2306 pheochromocytoma, IV:2579 spinal, IV:3132 tumor removal for, V:3415 Benoxaprofen, cholestasis from, II:784 Benson, Herbert on meditation, V:3594 relaxation therapy and, III:2147 Bentonite clay, for abscesses, I:14 Bentyl. See Dicyclomine Benylin DM. See Dextromethorphan Benzalkonium chloride, I:307, 308 Benzathine penicillin G for bejel, I:460 for pinta, IV:2603 for syphilis, IV:3229 Benzbromarone for gout, I:282 for hyperuricemia, I:282 Benzene acute leukemia from, III:1987 aplastic anemia from, I:337 chronic leukemia from, III:1991 delirium from, II:1021 miscarriage from, III:2204 myelofibrosis from, III:2282, 2283 Benzisoxidils, for psychosis, I:300 Benzocaine for hemorrhoids, I:275 for local anesthesia, I:190 methemoglobinemia from, III:2183–2184 with sunscreens, IV:3221 Benzodiazepines, I:466–469 abuse of, IV:3207 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93, 98 for alcohol withdrawal, V:3573 as anticonvulsants, I:253 for anxiety, I:231–233, 320 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for catatonia, II:676 for central nervous system depression, II:689 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 delirium from, II:1021 erection disorders from, IV:3051–3052 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 for insomnia, I:282 for mania, III:2113 as muscle relaxants, III:2259–2260 for night terrors, IV:2356, 3091 for panic disorder, IV:2483 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 constipation from, II:906 for coronary heart disease, II:931 cough from, II:942 with cystoscopy, II:996 with decongestants, II:1012 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 erection disorders with, IV:3051 for glaucoma, III:1459 for heart attacks, III:1533 for heart failure, III:1540 for heart valve disease, III:1551 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1708 for hypertension, I:279–281, 281, III:1722, 1723 for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 for ischemia, III:1870 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 Marfan syndrome and, III:2116 for migraine prevention, III:2189 for migraines, I:289, 291 for mitral valve prolapse, III:2208 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 for myocarditis, III:2290 for palpitations, IV:2466 for phobias, IV:2583 platelet aggregation test and, IV:2623 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2725 race differences and, IV:2573 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 for thyroiditis, V:3319, 3320 for ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 Beta brain wave, II:1152 Beta carotene aging and, I:71 for albinism, I:91 for cancer, II:637 for cataracts, II:673 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for gastritis, III:1407 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for sore throats, IV:3120 for tonsillitis, V:3328 for vitamin A deficiency, V:3512 Beta galactosidase, III:2230 Beta globin gene in beta thalassemia, V:3272 sickle cell disease and, IV:3041–3042 Beta globulins, IV:2747–2748 Beta glucuronidase, III:2230 Beta-hCG. See Beta human chorionic gonadotropin Beta human chorionic gonadotropin, V:3412 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Beta interferon, III:2252–2253 Beta lactam, I:150, 240, III:2278 Beta lactamase inhibitors, IV:2527 Beta lipoproteins, IV:3180 Beta-pleated sheet fibrils, II:695 Beta polypeptide, III:1577 Beta receptor agonists. See Bronchodilators Beta-subunit human chorionic gonadotropin test. See Human chorionic gonadotropin test Beta thalassemia, V:3270, 3271–3272, 3274–3275 Beta2 agonists, II:811 Beta2-microglobulin, III:2242, 2243 for AIDS, I:80, 86 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 test for, I:473–474 Betamethasone, II:936, 937 Betamethasone sodium acetate, I:495 Betamethasone sodium phosphate, I:495 Betapace. See Sotalol Betaxolol, I:475, III:2275 Betel nut, III:1516 Bethanechol with lipase test, III:2002 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 Bethesda system, for pap smear, IV:2486 Betoptic. See Betaxolol Beverages alcoholic (See Alcoholic beverages) carbonated (See Carbonated beverages) hot, with rosacea, IV:2918 juices (See Juice therapy) BF. See Bartenieff fundamentals Bhakti yoga, V:3595 See also Yoga BI-CROS hearing aids, III:1526 Biaxin. See Clarithromycin Bicarbonate HCO3, II:1158 Bicarbonate of soda, V:3449 Bicarbonates blood gas analysis for, I:527 for drug overdose, II:1106 in electrolyte disorders, II:1153 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 kidney function tests for, III:1913 levels of in acidosis, III:2179 in diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1055 in metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 with protein electrophoresis, IV:2747 for renal tubular acidosis, IV:2858 Biceps, in movement disorders, III:2222 Bichloroacetic acid for anal warts, I:173 3665 Bichloroacetic acid for phobias, I:73, IV:2583 for PTSD, IV:2686 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for sedation, IV:2983, 2984 for sleepwalking, IV:3091 substance abuse and, IV:3207 for tremor, V:3381 Benzoin for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for laryngitis, III:1958 for nail removal, IV:2310 Benzophenone, for sunburn prevention, I:620 Benzoyl peroxide for acne, I:25, 26, 226–228 with erythromycin, I:26 Benzphetamine, II:691 Benztropin, for Parkinson disease, I:296 Berard, Guy, I:415 Berard method. See Auditory integration training Bereavement family therapy for, II:1288 group therapy for, III:1485 hypochondriasis from, III:1733 after miscarriage, III:2205 mood disorders from, III:2216 self help groups for, III:1485 Bergamot, for furunculosis, I:537 Berger’s disease. See Idiopathic primary hematoma/proteinuric syndrome Beriberi, I:469–471, IV:3161, V:3525 Berry aneurysm. See Saccular aneurysm Berylliosis, I:472–473 Beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test, I:472 Beryllium sensitivity. See Berylliosis Beta agonists, for bronchodilation, I:120 Beta-amyloid, in Alzheimer’s disease, I:135, 138, 140 Beta blockers, I:474–477, 476 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for angina pectoris, I:195 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with antimalarials, I:288 anxiety and, I:318 for arrhythmias, I:353 with aspirin, I:379 with asthma, I:381 for atherosclerosis, I:397 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:408 with bronchodilators, I:602 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 Bichloroacetic acid for genital warts, III:1445 Bicillin. See Benzathine penicillin G Bicuspid valve. See Mitral valve Bifidobacterium for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 Bifocal lenses, II:1266 BIG. See Botulism immune globulin Big brain. See Megalencephaly Bikini incision. See Low transverse incision Bikram yoga, III:1514 Bilateral acoustic neuroma. See Acoustic neuroma Bilateral cingulotomy. See Cingulotomy, bilateral Bilateral hemispheric demyelination, V:3488 Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, II:1190, III:1761, IV:2937 Bilberry for angiomas, I:496 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for glaucoma, III:1461 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 Bile in biliary atresia, I:479 in cholecystitis, II:778 in diarrhea, II:1066 in digestion, II:773 gallbladder and, III:1379 in jaundice, III:1880–1881 in maldigestion, IV:3173 Bile acid resins, I:396 Bile acid sequesterants, II:789 Bile duct adenoma, III:2019 Bile duct cancer, I:477–479, II:779 See also Biliary tract cancer Bile duct obstruction. See Cholestasis Bile duct surgery for cholangitis, II:776 gangrene from, III:1394 Bile ducts biliary atresia, I:479–481 in cholecystitis, II:779 in cholestasis, II:783 Cryptosporidia in, II:967 in cyclosporiasis, II:981 with endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1199 hypotonic duodenography for, III:1759, 1760 inflammation of, II:773 in jaundice, III:1880–1881 with liver biopsy, III:2018 stricture of endoscopic sphincterotomy for, II:1199 from gallbladder surgery, III:1388 3666 Bile reflux gastritis, III:1399 Bile salts, II:783 Bilevel positive airway pressure ventilation, IV:3085 Bilharz, Theodor, IV:2953 Bilharziasis. See Schistosomiasis Biliary atresia, I:479–481, 480f Biliary cirrhosis causes of, II:815 with cholestasis, II:783 liver function tests for, III:2026 primary, IV:2717–2718 Biliary drainage, I:479 Biliary system abnormalities of, I:479 liver function tests for, III:2025–2027 liver transplantation for, III:2028 Biliary tract cancer, III:2019 with familial polyposis, II:1287 liver biopsy for, III:2017 See also Bile duct cancer; Cholangiocarcinoma Biliary tract infections, II:1235 Biliary tree, II:779 Bilious vomiting. See Bile reflux gastritis Bilirubin in biliary atresia, I:479–480 in cholecystitis, II:779 in cholestasis, II:783 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1228 with gallbladder cancer, III:1379 in gallbladder function, III:1382 in hyperpigmentation, III:1715 jaundice from, III:1880–1881, 1882 in liver cancer, III:2019 liver function tests for, III:2024–2027 in neonatal jaundice, IV:2330–2331 tests of, II:774 urinalysis for, V:3446 Billroth operation, V:3428 Biltricide. See Praziquantel Binaural hearing aids. See Hearing aids Binet, Alfred, IV:3153 Binet-Simon scale, IV:3153 Binge eating disorder, I:481–482 in children, II:762 in gays and lesbians, III:1416 Binge-purge behavior. See Bulimia Binocular polyopia. See Diplopia Binocular vision eye muscle surgery for, II:1269 vision training for, V:3508 Binocularity. See Binocular vision Bio-oxidative therapies, IV:2450–2451 Bioaccumulation of chemicals, in meat, V:3487 detoxification for, II:1041 Biocef. See Cephalexin Bioenergetics. See Energy metabolism Biofeedback, I:482–485, 483 for ADHD, I:413 for anxiety, IV:2782 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for bladder control, I:511 for brain tumors, I:573 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for cocaine addiction, II:833 for costochondritis, II:940 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for endometrial cancer, II:1191 for endometriosis, II:1194 for fecal incontinence, II:1301 for headache, III:1524 HRT and, III:1673 for hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 for IBS, III:1867 for insomnia, III:1845 for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 for ischemia, III:1871 for liver cancer, III:2021 for low back pain, III:2033 for menopause, III:2163 for migraines, III:2189 for movement disorders, III:2224 for nausea, IV:2326 for pain management, IV:2463 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for salivary gland tumors, IV:2934 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for sciatica, IV:2965 for seizures, IV:2989 for stress reduction, III:2165, IV:3189 for stress urinary incontinence, III:2123 for tinnitus, V:3323 for TMJ, V:3250 for torticollis, V:3341 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Bioflavonoid hesperidin, I:121 Bioflavonoid quercetin, IV:3067 Bioflavonoids for allergies, I:121 for angiomas, I:496 for bruises, I:608 for cold sores, II:846 for folliculitis, II:1352 for menorrhagia, III:2172 for sore throats, IV:3120 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Biojector 2000, III:2253 Biological clocks, II:824 Biological feedback. See Biofeedback Biological response modifiers, IV:2901 Biological rhythms jet lag and, III:1886 phototherapy and, IV:2590 sleep disorders of, IV:3088 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 mediastinoscopy for, III:2143 vs. MRI, III:2082 for mucormycosis, III:2232 muscle (See Muscle biopsy) nerve (See Nerve biopsy) for Niemann-Pick disease, III:2005 for otitis externa, IV:2432 for ovarian cancer, IV:2441 for penile cancer, IV:2530 for pica, IV:2596 for pleural effusion, IV:2629 punch (See Punch biopsy) rectal, II:1286 for rectal cancer, IV:2830 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 salivary glands (See Salivary gland biopsy) for sarcomas, IV:2943, 2944 scalpel, IV:3065 scissors, IV:3065 shave, III:2097, IV:3065 skin (See Skin biopsy) for sporotrichosis, IV:3143 stomach (See Stomach biopsy) for syphilis, IV:3229 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3233 for temporal arteritis, V:3248 for thyroid cancer, V:3307 uterine (See Uterine biopsy) vaginal (See Vaginal biopsy) for vasculitis, V:3480 Biosensors, I:484 Biotin, V:3524 with Atkins diet, I:402 seborrheic dermatitis from, II:1037 Biotinidase deficiency, V:3526 BiPAP ventilation, IV:3085 Biperiden, I:296 Biphosphates, for hypercalcemia, III:1698 Bipolar disorder, I:485–490 anticonvulsants for, I:253 bilateral cingulotomy for, IV:2770 calcium channel blockers for, II:627 in children, II:762, 765 with delusions, II:1022 with depression, II:1033 with dronabinol, II:644 drug therapy for, IV:2768 intermittent explosive disorder and, III:1846 mania in, III:2112 as mood disorders, III:2216 overhydration from, IV:2449 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 vs. schizoaffective disorder, IV:2956–2957 seasonal affective disorder with, IV:2980 from substance abuse, IV:3208 substance abuse and, IV:3208 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Bipyridine, for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 BIRADS. See Breast Reporting and Data System Bird fancier’s lung, III:1717 Bird of paradise flower poisoning, IV:2644 Bird seed. See Plantain Birds chlamydial pneumonia from, II:771 cryptococcosis from, II:964 extrinsic allergic alveolitis from, III:1716, 1717 histoplasmosis from, III:1639 mycobacterial infections from, III:2276 pulmonary fibrosis from, III:1775 Birth asphyxia. See Perinatal asphyxia Birth control condoms for, II:880–882 synthetic hormones for, II:1031–1032 tubal ligation for, V:3397–3399 See also Contraception Birth control pills. See Oral contraceptives Birth defects, I:490–493, 491f, 492 of abdominal wall, I:6 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127–128 amniocentesis and, I:154 anorectal fistula as, I:210 antenatal testing for (See Antenatal tests) from antimalarials, I:287 from antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 from antirheumatic drugs, I:306 from antituberculosis drugs, I:311 aortic dissection from, I:327 aortic valve insufficiency from, I:328 aortic valve stenosis as, I:329 arteriovenous fistula as, I:356 from barbiturates, I:446 from benzodiazepines, I:467 from calcium channel blockers, II:628 from cholesterol-reducing agents, II:790 CVS for, II:798 cystitis from, II:992 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:998–999, 999, IV:2540 from DES exposure, II:1040 from diabetes mellitus, II:1052 DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1071–1073 dislocations and subluxations from, II:1084 from Down syndrome, II:1098–1099 duodenal obstruction as, II:1110 entropion as, II:1271 from epoetin, II:643 3667 Birth defects Biological therapy. See Immunotherapy Biological warfare with anthrax, I:224 with plague, IV:2614 Bionenergetics, IV:3189 Biophysical profile, I:222 Biopsy, II:634, 635 for adrenal virilism, I:51 for AIDS, I:80 for amyloidosis, I:162 for anal cancer, I:170, 214 for angiomas, I:495 aspiration (See Aspiration biopsy) bladder (See Bladder biopsy) bone (See Bone biopsy) bone marrow (See Bone marrow biopsy) brain (See Brain biopsy) breast (See Breast biopsy) bronchial (See Bronchial biopsy) bronchoscopy with, I:604 with cancer therapy, II:640, 641 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 cervical (See Cervical biopsy) for cervical cancer, II:712, 713 for chalazion and eyelid tumors, II:1272 of choriocarcinomas, II:797 colonic, II:1286 cone (See Cone biopsy) CT-guided, II:968–969 with diagnostic arthroscopy, I:362 with EGD, II:1246 for elephantiasis, II:1167 endometrial (See Endometrial biopsy) esophageal (See Esophageal biopsy) FUO and, II:1318 for Gaucher’s disease, III:1413, 2005 for genital warts, III:1444 for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 for head and neck cancer, III:1517 heart (See Heart biopsy) for heavy metal poisoning, III:1560–1561 for Helicobacter pylori, III:1567 for hermaphroditism, III:1847 for histiocytosis, III:1639 for immune complex test, III:1784 incisional (See Incisional biopsy) for infectious arthritis, III:1820 intestinal (See Intestinal biopsy) joints (See Joint biopsy) for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 laparoscopic, III:1947, 1948 large core needle (See Large core needle biopsy) liver (See Liver biopsy) local anesthesia for, I:190 for lower esophageal ring, III:2035 lung (See Lung biopsy) for MALT lymphomas, III:2108 Birth defects from erythromycins, II:1232 from erythropoietin, III:1793 esophageal atresia as, II:1238 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 with gestational diabetes, III:1448 from guaifenesin, II:1254 hearing disorders from, II:838 in high risk pregnancy, III:1633 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 from immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 from infertility drugs, III:1831 intravenous urography for, III:1855 from iron deficiency, III:2190 from isotretinoin, I:26, 226 kyphosis as, III:1932 lower esophageal ring as, III:2034 lymphedema from, III:2067 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 from MAO inhibitors, III:2214 from measles, III:2140 mental retardation from, III:2175 methemoglobinemia as, III:2183–2184 microphthalmia and anophthalmia, III:2184–2185 miscarriage from, III:2204 missing limbs (See Congenital amputation) MRI for, III:2082 nail removal for, IV:2309 neurogenic bladder from, IV:2346 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 prematurity and, IV:2708 prenatal testing for (See Prenatal diagnosis) from raloxifene, I:543 of the rectum, II:1096 from rubella, IV:2541, 2926, 2928 SCID as, IV:3009 scoliosis (See Congenital scoliosis) sex change surgery for, IV:3011 skull x-rays for, IV:3082 spinal instrumentation for, IV:3133 spinal stenosis from, IV:3136 from STDs, IV:3020 stillbirth from, IV:3163 stool fat test for, IV:3174 from sulfonamides, IV:3216–3217 TEF as, V:3351 from TORCH viruses, V:3338 tricuspid valve stenosis from, V:3390 ultrasonography for prenatal detection, IV:2527 urinary diversion for, V:3451 of urogenital system, II:894–896 from vasodilators, V:3483 from vitamin A toxicity, V:3522 vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 Wilm’s tumor and, V:3564 3668 Birth order, II:892 Birthing process. See Childbirth; Delivery; Labor Birthmarks, I:493–497, 495, III:1960, 2210–2211, 2211, IV:3078 See also Vascular malformations Birthroot for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1114 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 Bisacodyl, for bowel preparation, I:563 Bisadocyl, as laxative, III:1964 Bisexual health. See Gay and lesbian health Bishydroxycoumarin, IV:2879 Bismuth for gastroenteritis, III:1409 before stool culture, IV:3172 before stool O & P test, IV:3174 Bismuth subsalicylate for diarrhea, I:264–266 for gastritis, III:1407 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for travelers diarrhea, V:3380 Bisphosphonates for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 for Paget’s disease, IV:2456, 2457 Bites and stings, I:497–505 allergic reaction to, I:115, 116, 121 anaerobic infections from, I:167 blood transfusions for, V:3368 with cellulitis, II:684 clenched fist injury from, II:820–822 diagnosis of, I:499–500 flushing of, V:3580 hives from, III:1642 infection from, I:206–208 insect (See Insect bites) lavender for, I:349 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 prevention of, I:503–504 prognosis of, I:503 rabies from, V:3583 rat-bite fever from, IV:2821 scrub typhus from, IV:2975 statistics of, I:497–498 topical antibiotics and, I:245 treatment for, I:500–503 wilderness medicine for, V:3563 Bithionol for fluke infection, II:1344 for parasitic disease, I:273 Bitot’s spots, V:3512 Bitter orange, I:351, V:3328 Bitters, for dry mouth, II:1109 Bitterwort. See Dandelion Blace Creek Canal virus, III:1508 Black cohosh for amenorrhea, III:2171–2172 for menopause, III:2162 for oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 for otitis media, IV:2435 for PMS, IV:2711 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 Black currant for menopause, III:2162 for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 for PCOS, IV:2656 Black dogwood. See Buckthorn Black Draught. See Senna Black-legged deer tick. See Ixodes Black light test, for pigmentation disorders, IV:3078 Black lung disease, I:505–506, 505 Black snakeroot. See Black cohosh Blackberries, for hemorrhoids, III:1594 Blackheads. See Acne Blackwater fever antimalarials and, I:287 jaundice from, III:1881 Blackwort. See Comfrey Bladder cancer of (See Bladder cancer) in chronic kidney failure, II:806 in congenital ureter anomalies, II:894, 895 control, in bed-wetting, I:453–454 with cross infection, III:1674 in cutis laxa, II:978 damage to from benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1201 from urinary catheterization, V:3451 diseases (See Bladder diseases) distended, from hydronephrosis, III:1689 diverticulum, from cutis laxa, II:978 drainage, IV:2467 electromyography of, II:1255 function of (See Bladder function) infections of in autonomic dysreflexia, IV:3129, 3131 from diaphragms, II:1065 urinalysis for, V:3443, 3445, 3447 intravenous urography for, III:1854 irrigation of, V:3375 lining of, cystoscopy for, II:996 menopause and, III:2159 overfilling of, cystometry for, II:995 perforated from cholecystectomy, II:778 from cystoscopy, II:997 from hysteroscopy, III:1767 from transurethral bladder resection, V:3375 stones (See Bladder stones) urinary diversion and, V:3451–3453 in urinary tract infections, V:3447 urine flow test for, V:3457 x-rays of, III:1923–1924 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 transurethral bladder resection for, V:3374 Bladder wrack, for hypothyroidism, III:1758 Blaeberry. See Bilberry Blam mint. See Lemon balm Blanching, cryoglobulin test for, II:961 Blastomyces dermatitidis, I:512 Blastomycosis, I:512–513, 513 South American (See South American blastomycosis) systemic antifungal drugs for, I:267 Bleaching (Skin), IV:3078, V:3527 Bleeding. See Hemorrhage Bleeding disorders. See Hematologic diseases Bleeding gums from periodontal diseases, IV:2547 from vitamin K deficiency, V:3519 Bleeding time, I:514–515 coagulation disorders and, II:826, 828, 829 tumor removal and, V:3416 Bleeding varices, I:515–517 Blennorrhea. See Inclusion conjunctivitis Blenoxane. See Bleomycin Bleomycin for anal warts, I:173 for cancer, II:740 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 in MOPP/ABVC chemotherapy, III:1646 scleroderma from, IV:2966 for testicular cancer, V:3258 Blepharoplasty, I:517–519, II:1275, IV:2621 Blepharoptosis. See Ptosis Blepharorrhaphy. See Tarsorrhaphy Blepharospasm, III:2222 Bleuter, Eugene, IV:2958 Blindness assistance for, V:3511 from Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 from conversion disorder, IV:3114 from corneal ulcers, II:922 from diabetes, IV:2468 from diabetes mellitus, II:1048, 1052 from eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2693 from eye cancer, II:1260 from eye muscle surgery, II:1270 from eyelid diseases, II:1273 from glaucoma, III:1457, 1458, 1461 hallucinations from, III:1504 from hemolytic uremic syndrome, II:1206 hysterical (See Hysterical blindness) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 with juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from keratitis, III:1906 from Krabbe’s disease, III:2004 legal, V:3509 from macular degeneration, III:2075 from measles, III:2139 from meningitis, III:2156 from orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2408 from overhydration, IV:2449 from papilledema, IV:2489 from perinatal infection, IV:2540, 2541 from prematurity, IV:2706 after radial keratotomy, IV:2806 from radiation, I:490 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 from retinal artery occlusion, IV:2875 from retinal vein occlusion, IV:2878–2879 from retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2880–2882 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3025 from STDs, IV:3020 from subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3200 from Tay-Sachs disease, III:2004 from temporal arteritis, IV:2666, V:3247 from toxoplasmosis, V:3349 from trachoma, V:3355, 3356 ultrasonography for, II:1258 from uveitis, V:3461 from ventricular shunts, V:3503 vs. visual impairment, V:3509 from vitamin A deficiency, IV:3161, V:3512, 3524 from X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, IV:2560 Blisters from atopic dermatitis, I:403 from chickenpox, II:749–750 from diaper rash, II:1063 from guinea worm infection, III:1494 vesicles as, IV:3074 vibriosis and, V:3507 Blistex, for cold sores, II:845 Bloating, from gastrostomy, III:1411 Blocadren. See Timolol Blood calcium levels in hypercalcemia, III:1697 parathyroid hormone test with, IV:2494–2495 cancer of (See Leukemia) in CAT scan, II:877 circulation of (See Blood circulation) 3669 Blood Bladder biopsy for bladder cancer, I:508 transurethral bladder resection for, V:3374 Bladder cancer, I:506–510,, 507f II:631, 632, 633 from bladder exstrophy, II:888 cystectomy for, II:983 cystometry for, II:995 hydronephrosis from, III:1689 intravenous urography for, III:1855 from schistosomiasis, IV:2954 transurethral bladder resection for, V:3374 urinary diversion for, V:3451 Bladder catheter. See Urinary catheterization Bladder diseases cancer (See Bladder cancer) from cyclophosphamide, III:1774 with epididymitis, II:1218 retrograde cystography for, IV:2892–2893 sitz bath for, IV:3061 Bladder exstrophy, II:888 Bladder function with bladder stones, I:511 with cervical spondylosis, II:720 with herniated disk, II:1081, III:1628 with paralysis, IV:2492 with spinal cord injuries, IV:3129–3130 Bladder neck suspension surgery. See Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure Bladder obstruction antihistamines and, I:278 bronchodilators with, I:602 cystometry for, II:994–995 oligohydramnios from, IV:2664 urinary incontinence from, V:3453 Bladder prolapse. See Cystocele Bladder stones, I:510–511 from benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1201 intravenous urography for, III:1855 Bladder surgery for bladder cancer, I:508 Burch procedure for, V:3455 Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure for, III:2123–2124, V:3455 transurethral, I:508, V:3374–3375 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Bladder training, I:511–512 for bed-wetting, I:455 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for stress urinary incontinence, III:2123 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Bladder tumors acute kidney failure from, I:44 bladder cancer from, I:506 cystoscopy for, II:996 Blood coagulation of (See Blood coagulation) deficiencies of, from babesiosis, I:433 deprivation of, exercise test and, IV:3191 diseases of (See Hematologic diseases) donation of (See Blood donation) fats (See Lipids) gonorrhea in, III:1472 meningitis in, III:2154 volume of (See Blood volume) Blood, coughing up. See Hemoptysis Blood-brain barrier alcohol and, I:95 antihistimines and, I:118–119 in cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 chemotherapy and, I:573 in liver encephalopathy, III:2022 meningitis and, III:2154, 2155 Blood cancer. See Leukemia Blood cells with alcoholism, I:96, 97 in aplastic anemia, I:336, 337 count of (See Complete blood count) histocompatibility testing on, V:3324 production of in Addison’s disease, I:53 in AIDS, I:76, 77, 80 from brachytherapy, IV:2816 in myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2279 Blood circulation dizziness from, II:1094, 1095 with fractures, II:1365 with heat treatment, III:1558 poor with decubitus ulcer, I:457 life support for, III:1999–2000 sildenafil citrate for, IV:3052–3053 SSRIs and, IV:2992 with stasis dermatitis, II:1037 Blood clots. See Thrombosis Blood clotting. See Blood coagulation Blood clotting drugs. See Anticoagulants Blood coagulation anticoagulants for, I:250–252 Budd-Chiari syndrome and, I:609–611 cascade fibrin split products and, II:1319 with partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507 from defibrillation, II:1016 in erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1228 fibrinogen test for, II:1320 with heat treatment, III:1558 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 3670 partial thromboplastin time for, IV:2507–2508 from placental abruption, IV:2612–2613 with RMSF, IV:2910 time test (See Prothrombin time) vitamin K and, V:3519–3520 in wounds, V:3582 Blood coagulation disorders, II:826–830 from anticancer drugs, I:246 with cephalosporins, I:242 with chronic leukemia, III:1992 Depo-Provera/Norplant with, II:1031, 1032 excess coagulation, III:1701 fibrin split products and, II:1318–1319 hemoptysis from, III:1589 with hormone replacement therapy, III:2160 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1793 iron deficiency anemia from, III:1860 jaundice from, III:1882 with joint replacement, III:1890–1891 with kidney biopsy, III:1907–1908 with liver biopsy, III:2017 with lung biopsy, III:2041 with measles, III:2139 from meningococcemia, III:2158 menorrhagia from, II:1112 mifepristone and, III:2186 from nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 with NSAIDs, I:175 partial thromboplastin time for, IV:2507–2508 with penicillins, IV:2528 with plasmapheresis, IV:2619 polycythemia vera as, IV:2658, 2660 PT test for, IV:2748–2750 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 recurrent miscarriages from, IV:2836 transhepatic biliary catheterization and, V:3370 Blood coagulation factors blood transfusions and, V:3366, 3368 in mushroom poisoning, III:2268 replacement of, III:1592 Blood coagulation tests for coagulation disorders, II:828 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 for hepatitis B, III:1601 Blood count. See Complete blood count Blood culture, I:522–524 for plague, IV:2615–2616 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for rat-bite fever, IV:2822 for typhoid, V:3422 Blood diseases. See Hematologic diseases Blood donation, I:524–526, V:3367 autologous (See Autologous blood donation) with isotretinoin, I:226–227 with mitral valve prolapse, III:2208 phlebotomy for, IV:2580 Blood donor screening, I:525, 526 Blood donors. See Blood donation Blood dyscrasias. See Multiple myeloma Blood fats. See Lipids Blood flow ambulatory electrocardiography for, III:1653 for amputation, I:158–159 cerebral (See Cerebral blood flow) in dementia, II:1024 dizziness from, II:1094, 1095 Doppler ultrasonography for, II:1097 endarterectomy for, II:1180 ginkgo for, III:1453 heat treatment for, III:1558 impedance phlebography for, III:1800–1801 in impotence, III:1804–1805 liver scan for, III:2027 in migraine, III:2187 MRA for, III:2082 MUGA scan for, III:2233 restriction arrhythmia from, II:679 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 from congenital heart disease, II:900 echocardiography for, II:1129 from embolism, I:355 fainting from, II:1279 peripheral vascular disease from, IV:2555 scrotal nuclear medicine scan for, IV:2973 in shock, IV:3033–3035 in stroke, IV:3194–3198 TCD for, V:3363 technetium heart scan for, V:3245 ultrasonography for, I:4 in varicose veins, V:3476 Blood gas analysis, I:527–528, 527, IV:2784 with chest physical therapy, II:747 COPD and, II:810 for cor pulmonale, II:917 for delirium, II:1022 for PAP, IV:2776 for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 for pulmonary edema, IV:2778 for pulmonary embolism, II:1170–1171, IV:2780 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in leukemia stains, III:1985 in lymphomas, III:2092 with measles, III:2139 in TIA, V:3371 in TORCH syndrome, V:3338 transfusions with kidney biopsy, III:1908 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2280 for necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 Blood poisoning. See Septicemia Blood pressure, III:1752, 1753 after adrenalectomy, I:64 aldosterone and, I:101 alpha1-adrenergic blockers and, I:129 with arteriovenous fistula, I:356 in arteriovenous malformations, I:357 in cardiac rehabilitation, II:659–660 in cardiac tamponade, II:660 with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 with diabetic foot infections, II:1054 during dialysis, II:1061 diastolic, III:1753 in dizziness, II:1094, 1095 in drug overdose, II:1105 in eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2692 in epidural anesthesia, I:190 in Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 in heat stress disorders, III:1557 during hemodialysis, I:45 high (See Hypertension) histamine and, III:2132 during HRT, III:1673 in hypothermia, III:1754 measurement of, III:1720, 1721 from overhydration, IV:2449 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 during physical examination, IV:2593 pulmonary artery catheterization for, IV:2777 regulation (See Blood pressure drugs) retinopathy and, IV:2890 in sedation, IV:2983, 2984 in septic shock, IV:3004 shock and, IV:3034 smoke inhalation and, IV:3102 sodium and, III:1709, 1710, 1742 in spinal anesthesia, I:190 for stroke prevention, IV:3198 systolic, II:830, III:1753 in TIA, V:3371 with ventricular fibrillation, V:3499 Blood pressure drugs ACE and, I:202–205, 205 for aortic dissection, I:327 for aortic valve insufficiency, I:328 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for cardiac tamponade, II:661 impotence from, III:1804 orthostatic hypotension from, IV:2411 penicillins with, IV:2529 Blood protein electrophoresis, IV:2747 Blood registry, I:524–526 Blood removal. See Phlebotomy Blood sugar. See Blood glucose Blood sugar tests. See Blood glucose tests Blood tests for ABPA, I:108 for acidosis, III:2179 for acne, I:25 for acute kidney failure, I:45 for acute leukemia, III:1988 for acute lymphangitis, I:47 for adenoviruses, I:57 for adrenal virilism, I:62 for adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 for AIDS, I:79–80, 82–87 for albinism, I:90 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for alcoholic hepatitis, III:1598 for aldolase, I:100 for aldosterone, I:101 for alkaline phosphatase, I:106–107 for Alport’s syndrome, I:131 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:137, IV:3000 for amebiasis, I:145 amino acid (See Amino acids) for amnesia, I:152 for amylase, I:160 for amyloidosis, I:162 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 for anaerobic infections, I:168 for anaphylaxis, I:180 for anemia, I:183, II:916 iron deficiency, III:1861 pernicious, IV:2558 sideroblastic, IV:3048 for aneurysmectomy, I:193 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 for anorexia nervosa, I:212 for anthrax, I:224–225 for antimyocardial antibodies, I:292 for anxiety, I:320 for anxiety disorder, I:323 for aplastic anemia, I:336 for APSGN, I:48 for arborvirus encephalitis, I:347 with arthroplasty, I:361 with arthroscopic surgery, I:363 for asbestosis, I:370 aspartate aminotransferase test, I:373 for aspergillosis, I:375 for Atkins diet, I:402 3671 Blood tests for respiratory acidosis, IV:2861 for respiratory alkalosis, IV:2862 for respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 for tetralogy of Fallot, V:3269 before thoracic surgery, V:3288 Blood glucose in diabetes mellitus, II:1048, 1050–1051, III:1468 with diabetic foot infections, II:1054 in diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1055, 1056 in diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 with diuretics, II:1089 in gestational diabetes, III:1447 guided imagery for monitoring, III:1490 Korean ginseng and, III:1455, 1456 lactic acid and, III:1944 lactose intolerance and, III:1945–1946 low levels of (See Hypoglycemia) with MAO inhibitors, III:2213 pancreatic transplantation for, IV:2467 tests for (See Blood glucose tests) with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 Blood glucose tests, I:528–530 for coronary heart disease, II:930 for diabetes mellitus, II:1050–1051 for hypoglycemia, III:1736 for impotence, III:1805 with kidney function tests, III:1913 with penicillins, IV:2528 self-monitoring, I:529, II:1051 with synovial fluid analysis, III:1889 Blood group incompatibility, II:1228 Blood grouping and crossmatching. See Blood typing Blood letting. See Phlebotomy Blood platelet disorders. See Platelet function disorders Blood platelets acid phosphatase in, I:23 in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 antiplatelet agents for, I:250 in bleeding time, I:514 blood donation and, I:525, 526 blood transfusions of, V:3367 coagulation disorders and, II:826, 827 in complete blood count, I:521 count (See Platelet count) disorders of (See Platelet function disorders) in erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1228 fibrin split products and, II:1319 in food poisoning, II:1356 in hypercoagulation, III:1701 in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777–1778 Blood tests for autoimmune diseases, I:424 for autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 for babesiosis, I:433 for bacillary angiomatosis, I:434–435 for bacteremia, I:436 for Bartonella henselae, II:670 for beriberi, I:470 for beta2-microglobulin, I:473–474 for birth defects, I:492 after bites, I:500 for blood donation, I:525, 526 with bone x-rays, I:557 with bowel resection, I:564 for brain abscess, I:567 for breast cancer, I:580 for brucellosis, I:606 for cancer, II:634 with cancer therapy, II:640, 741, 742 for carbohydrate intolerance, II:650 carcinoembryonic antigen test as, II:653–654 for catecholamines, II:677 for cellulitis, II:685 for Chagas’ disease, II:728 for chancroid, II:730 for child abuse, II:755 for cholecystitis, II:779 for cholestasis, II:785 for cholesterol, II:786 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for cirrhosis, IV:2717 for clozapine, I:488 for CNS infections, II:690 for CO poisoning, II:652 for coagulation disorders, I:514, 515, II:828 for coagulation time, IV:2507–2508 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for colostomy, II:862 for complement deficiencies, II:874 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 for constipation, II:906 for coronary heart disease, II:930 for corticotropin tests, I:65 for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 for Crohn’s disease, II:957–958 for cross infection, III:1675 for cryptococcosis, II:965 culture (See Blood culture) with cystoscopy, II:996 for dacryocystitis, II:1003 for dehydration, II:1017, IV:2791 for delirium, II:1022 for dementia, II:1026 for diabetes mellitus, II:1050–1051 for diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1055 for dialysis, II:1060 for diarrhea, II:1066 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for dizziness, II:1095 for drug overdose, II:1105 3672 for drug therapy monitoring, II:1107 for echinococcosis, II:1128 with ECMO, II:1256 for ehrlichiosis, II:1142 for electrolyte disorders, II:1155, II:1157–1159 for electrophysiologic tests, II:1165 for encephalitis, II:1178 for endocarditis, II:1184 for endocrine pancreatic cancer, IV:2472 for endometriosis, II:1193 for epididymitis, II:1219 for Epstein-Barr virus, II:1223–1225 for erysipelas, II:1225 for Fabry’s disease, III:2005 for facial paralysis, I:462 for familial polyposis, II:1286 for Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290–1291 for fatty liver, II:1299 fever and, II:1315 for fifth disease, II:1329 for fluke infection, II:1344 for folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 with fracture repair, II:1361 for fructose intolerance, III:1621 for G6PD, III:1464–1465 for galactorrhea, III:1376 for gallstones, III:1388 for gangrene, III:1394 for gastrinomas, III:1403 for gastrostomy, III:1411 for Gaucher’s disease, III:2005 for genetic disorders, III:1430 for genital herpes, III:1442 for gestational diabetes, III:1448 for glomerulonephritis, III:1462 glucose (See Blood glucose tests) for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 for goiter, III:1470–1471 for gout, III:1477 for granuloma inguinale, III:1483 for growth hormone tests, III:1488 before hair transplantation, III:1500 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 for head and neck cancer, III:1516 for heart attacks, III:1533 for heart transplantation, III:1546, 1547 for heavy metal poisoning, III:1560–1561 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 hematocrit (See Hematocrit) hemoglobin electrophoresis (See Hemoglobin electrophoresis) for hemoglobinopathies, III:1578 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for hemoptysis, III:1589 for hepatitis, III:1598, 1607, 1610–1612 for hepatitis C, III:1604 for hepatitis E, III:1608 for hernias, III:1627 for hiccups, III:1632 for hirsutism, III:1637 for histiocytosis, III:1639 HLA DNA probes for, III:1680–1681 in homeostasis monitoring, III:2000 before HRT, III:1673 for hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 for hypercalcemia, III:1697 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 for hypercoagulation, III:1701–1702 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1702 for hyperkalemia, III:1705 for hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 for hypersplenism, III:1719 for hypertension, III:1722 for hyperthyroidism, III:1724 for hypocalcemia, III:1732 for hypogonadism, III:1738 for hypokalemia, III:1740 for hypolipoproteinemia, III:1741 for hyponatremia, III:1743 for hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 for hypopituitarism, III:1748 for hypothermia, III:1754 for hysterectomy, III:1763 for ileus, III:1779 for immunologic deficiency syndromes, III:1791 for immunologic diseases, III:1786 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, III:1803 for indigestion, III:1814 for infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 for insecticide poisoning, III:1842 for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 for iron deficiency anemia, III:1861 for itching, III:1875 for jaundice, III:1883 for joint biopsy, III:1888 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 for kidney biopsy, III:1908 for kidney cancer, III:1910 for kidney failure, I:45, II:807 with kidney function tests, III:1912, 1913 for kidney stones, III:2016 with kneecap removal, III:1928 with lactate dehydrogenase test, III:1940, 1941 for lactic acid, III:1944 for laryngeal cancer, III:1952 for LDL cholesterol, II:787 for lead poisoning, III:1967 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1973 for leptospirosis, III:1981–1982 for leukemia, III:1985–1986, 1992 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2553 for peritonitis, IV:2556 for pernicious anemia, IV:2558 for peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2578 phlebotomy for, IV:2580 in physical examination, IV:2593 for pica, IV:2596 for pigmentation disorders, IV:3078 for pinta, IV:2603 for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 for pityriasis rosea, IV:2609 for pneumothorax, IV:2642 for poisoning, IV:2644 for poliovirus, IV:2649 for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 for polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 for polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2666 for polymyositis, IV:2667 for precocious puberty, IV:2691 for pregnancy, I:219, 220 for premature menopause, IV:2702 prematurity and, IV:2707 prenatal, IV:2697 for primary biliary cirrhosis, IV:2717 prostate biopsy and, IV:2727, 2729 for prostate cancer, IV:2731 for protein-energy malnutrition, IV:2744 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 for psoriasis, IV:2756 with psychiatric confinement, IV:2760 for puberty disorders, IV:2773 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 with pyloroplasty, IV:2792 before radial neck dissection, IV:2814 for recurrent miscarriages, IV:2837 for Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2851 for relapsing fever, IV:2853 for renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 for renal tubular acidosis, IV:2858 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2870 for retinoblastoma, IV:2884 for retinopathy, IV:2891 for Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900–2901 for riboflavin deficiency, IV:2907 for RSV, IV:2868 for rubella, IV:2927 for SCID, IV:3010 for scurvy, IV:2978 for secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 for septic shock, IV:3005 for shingles, IV:3032 for shock, IV:3034 for sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for smallpox, IV:3096–3097 for smoke inhalation, IV:3102 for somatitis, IV:3170 for South American blastomycosis, IV:3111 for spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 for splenic trauma, IV:3141 for sporotrichosis, IV:3143 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3158 for stomach ulcer, V:3431, 3433 for strongyloidiasis, V:3292 for subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3200 for substance abuse, IV:3209, 3210 before surgery, III:1426 for Sydenham’s chorea, IV:3223 for syphilis, IV:3228 for tapeworm disease, V:3240 for Tay-Sachs disease, III:2005 for temporal arteritis, V:3248 for thrombocytosis, V:3297 for thyroid cancer, V:3306 for thyroid function, V:3381 for TIA, V:3372 for TORCH antibodies, V:3338 for toxic shock syndrome, V:3347 for transhepatic biliary catheterization, V:3370 for tremor, V:3381 for trench fever, V:3384 for tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3395 for ulcerative colitis, V:3430 uric acid tests as, V:3442 with urinary diversion, V:3452 for uveitis, V:3462 for vagotomy, V:3470 for vasculitis, V:3480 for vibriosis, V:3507 for viral hepatitis, III:1610–1612 for vitamin A deficiency, V:3512 for vitamin D deficiency, V:3516 for vitamin deficiencies, V:3525 for vitamin toxicity, V:3523 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3545 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 for yaws, V:3589 Blood thinners. See Anticoagulants Blood transfusions, I:525, 526, V:3366–3369 2,3-DPG in, V:3420 AIDS from, I:74, 81, 83 with alemtuzumab, I:103 for anemia, I:183, III:2283 for babesiosis, I:433 for bartonellosis, I:452 for bleeding varices, I:517 blood typing and crossmatching for, I:531 for breast reconstruction, I:587, 589 brucellosis from, I:606 3673 Blood transfusions for lipase, III:2002 for listeriosis, III:2013 for liver cancer, III:2019, 2020 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 with liver scan, III:2027 for lung abscess, III:2039 with lung biopsy, III:2041 for lung transplantation, III:2055 for luteinizing hormone, III:2056 for Lyme disease, III:2059 for lymphangitis, I:47 for lymphocytes, III:2068 for lymphocytopenia, III:2070 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 for lymphomas, III:2093 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2086–2087 for malaria, III:2090 for malnutrition, III:2104, IV:2744 with MAO inhibitors, III:2213 for melioidosis, III:2151 for meningococcemia, III:2158 for menopause, IV:2702 in men’s health, III:2165 for menstrual disorders, III:2170 with mental status examination, III:2178 for metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 for methemoglobinemia, III:2184 for mineral deficiencies, III:2192 for mineral toxicity, III:2195 for movement disorders, III:2222 for multiple myeloma, III:2240 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2280 for myelofibrosis, III:2282 for myocarditis, III:2289 for myopathies, III:2295 for necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 for neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 for nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 for neuroblastoma, IV:2341 for oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 before oophorectomy, IV:2393 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 for orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 for osteomyelitis, IV:2420 for ovarian cancer, IV:2441 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2474 for pancreatitis, IV:2479–2480 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for parrot fever, IV:2506 for PCOS, IV:2655 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 for pericarditis, IV:2539 for perinatal infection, IV:2541–2542 for periodic paralysis, IV:2544 Blood transfusions cell therapy for, II:686 Chagas’ disease from, II:728 with chemotherapy, II:742 for coagulation disorders, II:829 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from, II:951 cytomegalovirus infections and, II:998, 1000 for dengue fever, II:1028 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 with ECMO, II:1257 for erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 with fibrinogen test, II:1320 for fifth disease, II:1329 for G6PD, III:1465 for gangrene, III:1395 graft vs. host disease (See Graft vs. host disease) for hantaviruses, III:1509 hematocrit test for, III:1571 with hemoglobin electrophoresis, III:1575 hemoglobin test with, III:1576 for hemolytic anemia, III:1580 for hemolytic uremic syndrome, II:1237 for hemorrhagic fevers, III:1592 hepatitis B from, III:1600 hepatitis C from, III:1602 hepatitis D from, III:1605 hepatitis G from, III:1609 for hookworm disease, III:1668 jaundice and, III:1882, 1884 for joint replacement, III:1892 Kaposi’s sarcoma from, III:1897 in life support, III:2000 for lung biopsy, III:2041 with malaria, III:2088 for Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 neonatal magnesium deficiency from, III:2079 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 for placenta previa, IV:2611 for placental abruption, IV:2384, 2613 for plastic surgery, IV:2621 for pseudoxanthoma elasticum, IV:2754 for pyruvate kinase deficiency, IV:2795 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 reaction to anemia from, III:1576 haptoglobin test for, III:1511 liver function tests for, III:2027 reactions to, V:3366, 3367–3368 for septic shock, IV:3005 for shock, IV:3035 for sickle cell anemia, III:1578 for sickle cell disease, IV:3046 3674 for sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 for splenectomy, IV:3140 for splenic trauma, IV:3142 for strongyloidiasis, V:3292 for thalassemia, III:1578 tropical spastic paraparesis from, V:3395 for ulcerative colitis, V:3430 for uterine fibroids, V:3459 viral hepatitis from, III:1610–1611 for Von Willebrand disease, V:3532 for wounds, V:3583 for yellow fever, V:3591 Blood typing, I:531–534, 532f for blood donation, I:525 for blood transfusions, V:3367–3368 for erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1229 in heart transplantation, III:1546 Blood urea nitrogen in acute kidney failure, I:45 test of, I:535 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 with creatinine test, II:949–950 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for kidney function, III:1913 Blood vessel diseases. See Vascular diseases Blood vessels abnormalities of arteriovenous fistula as, I:356 bleeding time test for, I:514 in congenital heart disease, II:899 from hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 ACE and, I:205 in angina pectoris, I:229 arteriovenous malformations, I:357–358 with aspirin, I:378 in atherosclerosis, I:393 in barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 cauterizing, laser surgery for, III:1959 cranial, in migraine, III:2187 in cutis laxa, II:978 damage to from arthroscopic surgery, I:364 from catheter ablation, II:680 in cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 from debridement, II:1008 in edema, II:1133 infection of, from campylobacteriosis, II:631 in macular degeneration, III:2075, 2076 with meningococcemia, III:2157–2158 menopause and, III:2159 in migraines, III:2187 with mucormycosis, III:2232 nasal packing for, IV:2314 obstructions arrhythmia from, II:679 in Buerger’s disease, I:611 from echinococcosis, II:1127 fainting from, II:1280 from hypercoagulation, III:1701 peripheral vascular disease from, IV:2555 pulmonary embolism, IV:2779 stroke from, V:3370 TIA from, V:3370 penile, sildenafil citrate for, IV:3052–3053 in Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 stenosis, in acrocyanosis, I:31 subarachnoid hemorrhage and, IV:3201 trigeminal neuralgia from, V:3391 ultrasonography for, I:4 vasodilators for, V:3482 in Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 Blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:519–520 with electric countershock, II:666 before eye muscle surgery, II:1269 with heart biopsy, III:2287 for joint replacement, III:1891 with ventricular assist devices, V:3498 Blood volume aldosterone and, I:100 in athletic heart syndrome, I:400 in cardiac tamponade, II:661 with fetal growth retardation, III:1852 in heat stress disorders, III:1557 from intracranial hypertension, I:444 in near drowning, IV:2327 with overhydration, IV:2449 Bloodstream. See Blood Blow ball. See Dandelion Blue Angels, on aviation medicine, I:427 Blue balm. See Lemon balm Blue cohosh for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1114 for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 for PCOS, IV:2656 for PID, IV:2523 Blue color blindness. See Color blindness Blue flag, for furunculosis, I:538 Blue ginseng. See Blue cohosh Blue lesions. See Pintid lesions Blue light, lens coatings for, II:1266 Blue moles. See Nevus Blue pimpernel. See Skullcap Blue River virus, III:1508 Blue skullcap. See Skullcap Blueberry for hemorrhoids, III:1594 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 regulation of, I:378 in sedation, IV:2983, 2984 Body temperature changes from antiarrhythmics, I:234 fever and, II:1313, 1316, 1317 in heat stress disorders, III:1557 hiccups from, III:1631 in hypothermia, III:1753, 1754 neuralgia from, IV:2339 pain from, IV:2459 Body weight in anorexia nervosa, I:211–212 cholecystitis and, II:779 in coronary heart disease, II:930 in dehydration, II:1016 with Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 with endarterectomy, II:1180 gout and, III:1476 for heart attack prevention, II:1366 with heel spurs, III:1562 high-risk pregnancy and, III:1632 for hypertension, I:475 with hypothyroidism, III:1757 in malnutrition, III:2104 in obesity (See Obesity) oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388 in spurious polycythemia, IV:2982 Bodywork. See specific kinds of bodywork Boils. See Furunculosis Bolivian hemorrhagic fever. See American hemorrhagic fever Bond, Mary, III:2225 Bone abnormalities of (See Bone abnormalities) acid phosphatase in, I:23 alignment, in fractures, II:1362, 1363, 1365 arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 axis, in fractures, II:1362 brittle from acute kidney failure, I:44 from chronic kidney failure, II:806 burns of, I:617 in bursitis, I:620 calcium for, III:1697 cancer of (See Bone cancer) in CAT scan, II:877 in cutis laxa, II:978 cysts, in osteoarthritis, IV:2413 in debridement, II:1008 degeneration from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713, 1714 kyphosis from, III:1932 diseases of (See Bone diseases) ear, I:414 estrogen and, III:1737 ethmoid, V:3587 floor, V:3587 heel (See Calcaneous) imaging, III:2082 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 infections (See Infectious bone diseases) inflammation of, V:3357 injuries fractures from, II:1362–1366 x-rays for, I:556 long, in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 loss, in astronauts, I:427–428 marrow (See Bone marrow) in mastocytosis, III:2132 mastoid (See Mastoid bone) menopause and, III:2159 metatarsal (See Metatarsal bone) in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 pain in (See Bone pain) pubic (See Pubic bone) scan of (See Bone scan) sodium in, III:1742 structure of, I:544 surgery of, IV:2409–2410 thigh (See Femur) transplantation of (See Bone transplantation) tumors of fractures from, II:1363 from Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 malignant (See Sarcomas) nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 x-rays for, I:556 x-rays of, I:556–558 Bone abnormalities from bisphosphonates, IV:2456 bone grafts for, I:544 from cutis laxa, II:978 with epoetin, II:643 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 from fractures, II:1363, 1364 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 from osteochondrosis, IV:2416 from Paget’s disease, IV:2455 from port wine stains, I:494 from sarcomas, IV:2942 septoplasty for, IV:3006 from STDs, IV:3020 from tetracyclines, I:490, V:3267 Bone aseptic necrosis. See Osteonecrosis Bone biopsy, I:538–539 for osteomyelitis, IV:2420 for osteopetroses, IV:2424 Bone cancer, IV:2941–2945 alkaline phosphatase and, I:106 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 biopsy for, I:538 chest x-ray for, II:747 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 fractures from, II:1363 grafts for, I:544 histiocytosis X, III:1638–1639 with Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647 from kidney cancer, III:1910 MRI for, III:2082 3675 Bone cancer for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 Blueberry root. See Blue cohosh Blunt trauma. See Injuries BMC. See Body mind centering BMD. See Becker muscular dystrophy BMT. See Bone marrow transplantation Body dysmorphic disorder obsessive-compulsive disorder and, IV:2381 plastic surgery and, IV:2621 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 Body fat. See Adipose tissue Body fluid tests for blastomycosis, I:513 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for empyema, II:1176 for histoplamsosis, III:1640 for measles, III:2139 for meningococcemia, III:2158 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 for rat-bite fever, IV:2822 Body fluids in dehydration, II:1016 diuretics for, II:1088 in edema, II:1133–1134 lymphogranuloma venereum from, III:2071 Body hair facial (See Facial hair) from hirsutism, III:1636 from vasodilators, V:3483 Body height, high-risk pregnancy and, III:1632 Body image in anorexia nervosa, I:211–212, 213 in gangrene, III:1395 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 in somatoform disorders, IV:3115 Body lice. See Pediculosis humanus corporis Body mass index in lesbians, III:1416 in malnutrition, III:2104 Body mind centering, III:2226 Body mind interaction. See Mind-body relations Body piercing, IV:2598, 2598–2600 Body ringworm. See Tinea Body scan. See Computed tomography scan Body surface area, in burns, I:617 Body temperature in death, II:1005 in drug overdose, II:1105 in hypothermia, III:1754 with hypothyroidism, III:1757 with multiple sclerosis, III:2251 during physical examination, IV:2593 in premature infants, III:2248, 2249 Bone cancer nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 from Paget’s disease, IV:2455 from small cell lung cancer, III:2048 See also Bone pain; Osteosarcoma Bone cement, in joint replacement, III:1891 Bone damage from acrodermatitis continua of Hallopeau, IV:2756 from echinococcosis, II:1127, 1128 foot care with, II:1357 from mucormycosis, III:2232 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 from mycetoma, III:2275 from nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 orthopedic surgery for, IV:2410 from Refsum disease, III:2004 Bone deformities. See Bone abnormalities Bone densitometry. See Bone density scan Bone density fractures and, II:1365 in multiple myeloma, III:2243 in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 Bone density scan, I:540–541 for anorexia nervosa, I:212 before HRT, III:1673 for hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 for hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 for malnutrition, III:2104 for mineral deficiencies, III:2196 for osteoporosis, IV:2426 Bone development in achondroplasia, I:21 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 delayed (See Growth disorders) fluoroquinolones and, II:1345 in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 stimulation of, I:546–547 Bone diseases alkaline phosphatase and, I:106, 107 biopsy for, I:538–539 from campylobacteriosis, II:631 of the eye, V:3587 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 infectious, IV:3096 liver function tests for, III:2025 with osteoarthritis, IV:2412 sciatica from, IV:2963 from TORCH tests, V:3339 from vitamin D deficiency, V:3515 Bone disorder agents, I:541–544 Bone formation. See Bone development Bone grafting. See Bone transplantation Bone growth. See Bone development Bone infections. See Infectious bone diseases Bone marrow in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 3676 in aplastic anemia, I:336 biopsy (See Bone marrow biopsy) cancer of (See Bone marrow cancer) with chloramphenicol, III:1587 for chromosome analysis, III:1438 in chronic leukemia, III:1990–1992 diseases of (See Bone marrow diseases) in eosinophilic granuloma, III:1638 in hairy cell leukemia, III:1501, 1502 in jaundice, III:1881 lesions of, II:1320 with lymphomas, III:2092 in myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2279 radiation injuries to, IV:2808 role of, III:1643 sampling (See Bone marrow biopsy) in secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 transplantation of (See Bone marrow transplantation) Bone marrow aspiration. See Bone marrow biopsy Bone marrow biopsy, I:547–549, 548f for acute leukemia, III:1988 for amyloidosis, I:162 for anemia, I:183, IV:3048 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 for jaundice, III:1883 for leukemia, III:1985–1986, 1992 for leukocytosis, III:1994 for lung cancer, III:2048 for lymphomas, III:2093 for multiple myeloma, III:2241 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2280 for myelofibrosis, III:2282 for neuroblastoma, IV:2341 for neutropenia, IV:2354 for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 for sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 for thrombocytosis, V:3297 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3546 Bone marrow cancer Ewing’s sarcoma, IV:2942 hematocrit test for, III:1572 reticulocyte count for, IV:2875 Bone marrow diseases from brachytherapy, IV:2815 cancer (See Bone marrow cancer) complete blood count for, I:521 from cyclophosphamide, III:1774 graft vs. host (See Graft vs. host disease) graft vs. host disease (See Graft vs. host disease) with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 kidney damage from, IV:2337 kidney stones from, III:1917 lymphocyte tests for, III:2068 with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 myelofibrosis as, III:2281–2283 normocytic anemia from, IV:2839 platelet count for, IV:2624 from pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 Bone marrow suppression from cancer therapy, II:640, 641, 741 supportive cancer therapy for, II:642–645 Bone marrow transplantation, I:550–555, 551f, II:635 for acute leukemia, III:1988–1989 for adrenoleukodystrophy, I:67 alemtuzumab for, I:102 for anemia, I:183, 337 for aplastic anemia, I:183, 337 for breast cancer, I:583 brucellosis from, I:606 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:654 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for complement deficiencies, II:874 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072, III:1787 with fifth disease, II:1329 graft vs. host disease (See Graft vs. host disease) for hemoglobinopathies, III:1578 HLA DNA probes for, III:1680 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647 for immunologic deficiency syndromes, III:1791 immunosuppressant drugs for, III:1796 for leukemia, III:1988–1989, 1992 for lymphocytopenia, III:2070 for lymphomas, III:2094 for mucopolysaccharidoses, III:2231 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2280–2281 for myelofibrosis, III:2282, 2283 for neuroblastoma, IV:2341–2342 for Niemann-Pick disease, III:2005 for osteopetroses, IV:2424 for platelet function disorders, IV:2626 for porphyria, IV:2674 reticulocyte count for, IV:2874 for SCID, III:1787, IV:3010 shingles and, IV:3031 for sickle cell disease, IV:3047 for Wilm’s tumor, V:3565 for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, V:3570–3571 for X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, IV:2561 Bone nails with jaw fixation, III:1885 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Borrelia burgdorferi, III:2057–2060 Boston diagnostic aphasia examination, I:335 Botanical aromatics. See Aromatic plants Botanical medicine. See Herbal medicine Botox. See Botulinum toxins Bottle-brush. See Horsetail Bottle feeding vs. breastfeeding, III:1942 with colic, II:847 inability, from prematurity, IV:2706 Bottle mouth caries, V:3329 Botulinum toxin injections, I:558–559, I:560 Botulinum toxins, I:463, 561, II:1356 for achalasia, I:20 botulism from, I:559–562 for cerebral palsy, II:705 for contracture, IV:3131 for eye muscle alignment, II:1269 Gulf War syndrome and, III:1495 medical use of (See Botulinum toxin injections) for movement disorders, III:2221, 2223 for spasticity, III:2253 for torticollis, V:3341 for tremors, V:3381–3382 Botulism, I:558, I:559–562 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from clostridium botulinum, V:3382 from food poisoning, II:1354–1355, 1356 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2549, 2551, 2554 Botulism immune globulin, I:561 Botulism toxins. See Botulinum toxins Bouchard’s nodes. See Osteoarthritis Bougienage for esophageal diverticulum, II:1245 for lower esophageal ring, III:2035 Bovet, Daniele, I:277 Bovine cartilage, for liver cancer, III:2021 Bovine myelin, for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 Bovine spongiform encephalopathy, II:950, 951–952, 953–954 Bowed arms, from vitamin D deficiency, V:3516 Bowed legs from achondroplasia, I:22 from vitamin D deficiency, V:3516 Bowel cancer of (See Intestinal cancer) distended, from TEF, V:3351 obstruction of (See Intestinal obstruction) perforation of (See Intestinal perforation) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 preparation of (See Bowel preparation) straining of, rectal prolapse from, IV:2835, 2836 Bowel function with atopic dermatitis, I:405 in colic, II:847 in constipation, II:905 in hemorrhoids, I:275 with herniated disk, II:1081, III:1628 loss of with paralysis, IV:2492 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3129–3130 menopause and, III:2163 reflexology for, IV:2842 thyroxin in, III:1470 training for, I:565 Bowel incontinence. See Fecal incontinence Bowel ischemia from aneurysmectomy, I:193 bowel resection for, I:563–565 Bowel obstruction. See Intestinal obstruction Bowel perforation. See Intestinal perforation Bowel preparation, I:562–563, II:1195 Bowel resection, I:563–565 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 stool fat test for, IV:3174 Bowel training, I:565–566 for hemorrhoids prevention, III:1594 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 Bowen’s disease. See Squamous cell carcinoma Bowers, Edwin, IV:2842 Bowman-Gray Medical School, III:2162 Bowman’s capsule, IV:2336 Boxing concussion from, II:879 maxillofacial trauma from, III:2135 BPD. See Borderline personality disorder BPH. See Benign prostatic hypertrophy Braces, orthopedic. See Orthopedic braces Brachytherapy, IV:2815–2816 for anal cancer, I:171 for bladder cancer, I:508 for brain tumors, I:572 for cancer, II:635, 640 for eye cancer, II:1261 for retinoblastoma, IV:2886 with transurethral bladder resection, V:3374 See also Radiation therapy Bradley method, II:761 3677 Bradley method in orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 Bone pain from elephantiasis, II:1167 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 from multiple myeloma, III:2240 from Paget’s disease, IV:2455 Bone plates with jaw fixation, III:1885 in spinal instrumentation, IV:3134 Bone scan, I:555–556 for acute leukemia, III:1988 with biopsy, I:538 for fractures, II:1364 for osteochondrosis, IV:2416 for prostate cancer, IV:2731 for sarcomas, IV:2943, 2944 with x-rays, I:557 Bone screws with jaw fixation, III:1885 in orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 Bone segments. See Fractures Bone shaft, in fractures, II:1362 Bone spurs in cervical disk disease, II:718 in cervical spondylosis, II:720 coccyx, II:836 heel (See Heel spurs) myelography for, III:2285 with osteoarthritis, IV:2412 with rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 septoplasty for, IV:3006 Bone tissues, in fractures, II:1362 Bone transplantation, I:544–545 for herniated disk, III:1630 orthopedic, IV:2410 for sarcomas, IV:2944 for spinal fusion, II:1081 with spinal instrumentation, IV:3134 Bone wires, in spinal instrumentation, IV:3134 Boneset, for influenza, III:1835 Bonine. See Meclizine Bontril. See Phendimetrazine Bopine. See Meclizine Borage oil for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 Borderline personality disorder, III:2246, IV:2564–2567 Bordetella pertussis, V:3557–3559 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 sputum culture for, IV:3149, 3150 Boric acid electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 toxicity, III:2194 Bornholm’s disease. See Epidemic pleurodynia Boron for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 in nutrition, III:2196 Borrelia, IV:2852 Bradycardia Bradycardia in arrhythmias, I:352 with beta blockers, I:476 electrophysiologic tests for, II:1163, 1165 heart block and, III:1536 from neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 pacemaker for, IV:2453 from sick sinus syndrome, IV:3039 from tensilon test, V:3254 Bradykinesia, III:2222 Brag’s disease. See Brucellosis Braid, James, III:1728 Brain abnormalities of (See Congenital brain defects) arteries (See Cerebral arteries) with arteriovenous fistula, I:356 aspartate aminotransferase in, I:374 biopsy (See Brain biopsy) blood clots in, II:1253 blood flow in, V:3363 cancer of (See Brain cancer) CAT scan of, II:875, 877 catecholamines in, II:677 cocaine and, II:832 diseases of (See Brain diseases) edema of (See Cerebral edema) electric stimulation of, II:1145–1147 imaging (See Brain scan) infections (See Brain diseases) injuries to (See Brain injuries) in Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 lactate dehydrogenase in, III:1939, 1941 menopause and, III:2159 in movement disorders, III:2221–2222 oxygen levels, II:1046 scan of (See Brain scan) size, with fetal growth retardation, III:1852 stress and, III:1425 surgery (See Brain surgery) Brain abscess, I:15, 16, I:566–567 from animal bite infections, I:206 from empyema, II:1176 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2014 from mastoidectomy, III:2134 from mastoiditis, III:2134, 2135 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 from orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2408 from otitis externa, IV:2432 seizures from, IV:2986 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 Brain activity in barbiturate-induced coma, I:443 electroencephalography for, II:1151 hallucinations from, III:1504 in multiple sclerosis, III:2249–2250 3678 vegetative state and, V:3488–3489 Brain attack. See Stroke Brain biopsy, I:567–568, I:572 for brain abscess, I:566 for cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 craniotomy for, II:946 for encephalitis, II:1178 Brain-body interaction. See Mind-body relations Brain cancer, I:569–574 from acute leukemia, III:1988 alkaline phosphatase and, I:106 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 craniotomy for, II:946–948 creatine kinase test for, II:948 radiation therapy for, IV:2810 Brain cells in arbovirus encephalitis, I:347 degeneration of, IV:2721 in dementia, II:1024 in progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 Brain chemistry imbalances in, III:2213 paranoia from, IV:2493 psychosis and, IV:2765 Brain damage from abscess, I:16 from anoxia, I:216, 217 from arteriovenous malformations, I:357 from aspirin, I:378 Bender-Gestalt test for, I:465 bronchodilators with, I:601 from choking, II:773 from concussion, II:879 conduct disorder from, II:883 from CPR, II:662, 665 from craniotomy, II:947 from decompression sickness, II:1009 from dehydration, II:1017 from echinococcosis, II:1127 from eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2692 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 electroencephalography for, II:1151 from endocarditis, II:1183 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 from falciparum malaria, III:2090 from hydrocephalus, II:890 from hypernatremia, III:1710 from hypoglycemia, I:530 from intracranial hypertension, I:444 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1879–1880 from lead poisoning, III:1965 learning disorders from, III:1969 with life support, III:2001 from liver encephalopathy, III:2022 from measles, III:2139 mental status examination for, III:2178 from mucormycosis, III:2232 from mumps, III:2255 from neonatal jaundice, III:1883, IV:2331 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004 nystagmus from, IV:2371 from overhydration, IV:2449 from prematurity, IV:2706–2707 from psychosurgery, IV:2770 from Reye’s syndrome, III:2026, IV:2895 from STDs, IV:3020 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3201, 3203 from TIA, V:3370 from ventricular fibrillation, V:3500 vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 Brain death vs. coma, II:866 electroencephalography for, II:1151 evoked potential studies for, II:1248 Brain diseases addiction as, I:51 from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 amnesia from, I:152–153 antimalarials and, I:287 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:302 with benzodiazepines, I:467 biopsy for, I:567–568 cancer (See Brain cancer) CNS infections, II:690 vs. dissociative disorders, II:1087 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 electroencephalography for, II:1151 from enteroviruses, II:1212 from fluke infection, II:1343 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 from furunculosis, I:538 from gonorrhea, III:1472 hallucinations from, III:1504 with methadone, III:2182 MRI for, III:2083–2084 with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 nystagmus from, IV:2372 from otitis externa, IV:2432 from PTSD, IV:2686 sleep disorders from, IV:3089 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 Brain edema. See Cerebral edema Brain enzymes, II:948 Brain function in hypothermia, III:1754 music therapy for, III:2269 in pain, IV:2459 in paresthesia, IV:2365 in sedation, IV:2984 sex hormones and, III:1738 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 aphasia from, I:333, IV:3123 barbiturate-induced coma for, I:444 biopsy for, I:567–568 CAT scan for, II:875, 877 vs. cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 cerebrospinal fluid analysis for, II:707 from choriocarcinomas, II:797, 798 craniotomy for, II:946–948 defined, I:568–569 delirium from, II:1021 dementia from, II:1025 demographics, I:569 diagnosis of, I:571–572 electroencephalography for, II:1151 enteral nutrition after, V:3400 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 galactorrhea from, III:1375 vs. migraines, III:2188 MRI and, III:2083 nosebleed from, IV:2364 ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2395 papilledema from, IV:2488 precocious puberty from, IV:2691 prevention of, I:574 with prochlorperazine, I:293 prognosis of, I:573–574 from retinoblastoma, II:1260 retinoblastoma from, IV:2882 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 treatment of, I:572–573 types, I:570 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 visual impairment from, V:3510 vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 See also Intracranial hypertension Brain ventricles. See Cerebral ventricles Brain waves, II:1152 Brainstem. See Brain stem Branch retinal artery occlusion. See Retinal artery occlusion Branch retinal vein occlusion. See Retinal vein occlusion BRAO. See Retinal artery occlusion Bras, for breast reduction, I:591 BRAT diet for diarrhea, II:1067 for food poisoning, II:1355 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 Braxton Hicks contractions in pregnancy, IV:2697 premature labor and, IV:2701 Brazilian hemorrhagic fever. See American hemorrhagic fever BRCA-1 gene breast cancer and, I:579 cancer and, III:1437 endometrial cancer and, II:1188–1189 genetic testing for, III:1437 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 BRCA-2 gene breast cancer and, I:579 cancer and, III:1437 endometrial cancer and, II:1188–1189 genetic testing for, III:1437 Breakfast cereal, V:3485 Breast augmentation, I:586–590 cancer of (See Breast cancer) diseases (See Breast diseases) in elephantiasis, II:1167 fibrocystic, II:1323 with genital herpes, III:1441 implants for, I:585 infections of, with breastfeeding, III:1943 injuries to breast implants for, I:585 breast reconstruction for, I:586 menopause and, III:2159 pain in, II:1325 phantom, after mastectomy, III:2130 physical examination of, IV:2593 prosthesis, I:586 reduction, I:588 self-examination of (See Breast selfexamination) ultrasonography of (See Mammary ultrasonography) Breast biopsy, I:575–577, 576f for breast cancer, I:580 for fibroadenoma, II:1321–1322 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1324 mammary ultrasonography with, I:593 after mammography, III:2112 for mastectomy, III:2128 for Paget’s disease of the breast, III:2158 Breast cancer, I:576, 577–584, 581, II:631–634, 636, V:3576 ataxia-telangiectasia carriers and, I:388 atypical ductal hyperplasia and, II:1324 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 brachytherapy for, IV:2815 brain tumor from, I:569, 574 breast biopsy for (See Breast biopsy) breast implants for, I:585 breast reconstruction for, I:586 with breastfeeding, III:1943 CA-15-3 antigen in, V:3413 CA-27.29 antigen in, V:3413 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 with Depo-Provera, II:1031–1032 diabetes insipidus from, II:1046 endometrial cancer and, II:1188–1189 3679 Breast cancer Stanford-Binet intelligence scale, IV:3153 Brain hemorrhage in autonomic dysreflexia, IV:3129 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:694 craniotomy for, II:946 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 vegetative state from, V:3488 Brain infections. See Brain diseases Brain injuries from anoxia, I:216, 217 aphasia from, I:333, 334, 335 ARDS from, I:68 barbiturate-induced coma for, I:444 biofeedback for, I:482 from brain biopsy, I:568 congenital brain defects from, II:891 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 with group therapy, III:1484 hallucinations from, III:1504 from head injuries, III:1519 vs. labyrinthitis, III:1935 learning disorders from, III:1969 from maxillofacial trauma, III:2135–2136 mental retardation from, III:2175 movement disorders from, III:2221 paralysis from, IV:2491 sports-related, IV:3146 Brain Injury Association, IV:3201 Brain mapping, II:1151 Brain metabolism, III:1521 Brain proteins, II:952–953 Brain scan with brain biopsy, I:567 for brain tumor, I:571 with MRI, III:2082, 2083–2084 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 for stuttering research, IV:3199 Brain stem acoustic neuroma and, I:27, 29, 30 arteriovenous malformations, I:357 in evoked potential studies, II:1248 poliovirus in, IV:2649 in PSP, IV:2721 vegetative state and, V:3488 Brain stem auditory evoked potentials, II:1248 Brain stem diseases, IV:3099 Brain surgery vs. barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 barbiturate-induced coma for, I:443 diabetes insipidus from, II:1046 meningitis from, III:2154 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for tumor, I:572, 573 Brain swelling. See Cerebral edema Brain tumors, I:568–574, 571f acoustic neuroma, I:27–30 anosmia from, IV:3099 Breast cancer estrogens and, I:246 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 fibrocystic condition of the breast and, II:1323, 1325 galactorrhea from, III:1375 with Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647, 1649 hormone replacement therapy and, IV:3000 HRT and, III:1670, 1671–1672, 2160, 2161 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 hypophysectomy for, III:1745 hysterosonography with, III:1768 lesbian health and, III:1415 liver cancer from, III:2019 lumpectomy for, III:2036–2038 mammography for, III:2110–2113 mastectomy for, III:2128–2131 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 from obesity, IV:2373 oophorectomy for, IV:2392 with oral contraceptives, IV:2401, 2402 Paget’s disease of the breast and, IV:2457–2458 phytoestrogens and, III:2162 radiation exposure, III:1649 salivary gland tumors from, IV:2933 self-examination for, I:591–592 spinal metastasis of, III:2031 superior vena cava syndrome with, IV:3222 surgery for (See Lumpectomy; Mammography; Mastectomy) ultrasonography for, IV:2525, 2527 See also Cancer Breast conservation surgery. See Lumpectomy Breast cysts. See Fibrocystic condition of the breast Breast diseases abscess, III:2131 cancer (See Breast cancer) fibroadenoma and, II:1321 fibrocystic (See Fibrocystic condition of the breast) Breast examination, II:634 for hormone contraceptives, II:1031–1032 HRT and, III:1673, 2161 self (See Breast self-examination) Breast feeding. See Breastfeeding Breast fibroadenoma. See Fibroadenoma Breast growth, in men. See Gynecomastia Breast implants, I:585–586, IV:2622 in breast reconstruction, I:587 breast self-examination with, I:591 mammary ultrasonography and, I:592 3680 Breast lumps breast biopsy for, I:575 fibroadenoma and, II:1321 from Norplant, II:1032 with oral contraceptives, IV:2403 self-examination for, I:591–592 Breast massage, II:1325 Breast palpation, II:1321 Breast pumps, III:1942 Breast reconstruction, I:586–590, 588f, IV:2621 breast cancer and, I:584 after mastectomy, III:2129–2130 Breast reduction, I:590–591 Breast Reporting and Data System, III:2111 Breast self-examination, I:591–592, II:633, 634 breast biopsy with, I:575 for fibroadenoma, II:1321 with mammography, III:2110 Breast tumors breast biopsy for, I:575 fibroadenoma and, II:1321 Breast ultrasonography. See Mammary ultrasonography Breastfeeding, III:1942–1943 with ACE inhibitors, I:204 amenorrhea from, III:2169 with anti-insomnia agents, I:283 with antiacne agents, I:227 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 with anticoagulants, I:251 with anticonvulsants, I:254 with antihelminthic drugs, I:275 with antimalarials, I:287 with antimigraine agents, I:290 with aspirin, I:378 with barbiturates, I:446 with benzodiazepines, I:467 beriberi and, I:469 with beta blockers, I:476 with bone nuclear medicine scan, I:555 with breast implants, I:586 after breast reduction, I:590 breast self-examination and, I:591 bronchodilators and, I:601 caffeine and, II:626 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 calcium levels and, III:1713 with cephalosporins, II:693 Chagas’ disease from, II:727 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:790 with cisapride, I:273 with colic, II:847 cytomegalovirus in, V:3339 with decongestants, II:1011 for dehydration, II:1018 with diuretics, II:1089 for E. coli infection prevention, II:1237 with erythromycins, II:1232 fibrocystic condition of the breast and, II:1325 with fluoroquinolones, II:1345 folic acid and, II:1349 with food poisoning, II:1355 FTT and, II:1279 gallium scans and, III:1383, 1384 general anesthetics and, I:188 with gout drugs, III:1479 with hydroxyzine, I:285 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 inability, from prematurity, IV:2706 interferons and, III:1794 with kidney scans, III:1914 laser eye surgery and, IV:2586 malnutrition with, III:2103–2104 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 mastitis and, III:2131, 2132 nalidixic acid and, V:3448 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2330 with neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 NSAIDs and, IV:2362 with opioid analgesics, I:177 with oral contraceptives, IV:2403 with overhydration, IV:2449 oxytocin for, II:1108, 1109 protease inhibitors and, IV:2742 protein-energy malnutrition and, IV:2743 with reverse transcriptase inhibitors, IV:2359 for RSV prevention, IV:2869 sexual dysfunctions with, IV:3016 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 SSRIs and, IV:2991 St. John’s wort and, IV:3153 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3156 with sulfonamides, IV:3217 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:268 technetium heart scan and, V:3246 tropical spastic paraparesis from, V:3395 with vaccines, V:3468 Breath odor, poisoning and, IV:2644 Breath tests for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for indigestion, III:1814 for substance abuse, IV:3210 Breathing cessation of in death, II:1005 in sudden cardiac death, IV:3212 difficulty (See Breathing difficulty) in drug overdose, II:1105 life support for, III:1999 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Briggs, Isabel, III:2286 Briggs, Katharine C. Myers, III:2286 Brill -Zinsser typhus, V:3423–3424 Briquet’s syndrome. See Somatoform disorders British Association for Spina Bifida and Hydrocephalus, III:1687 British familial amyloidosis, II:696 British Medical Association, III:1729 British Medical Journal on fecal incontinence, II:1300 on sildenafil citrate, IV:3052, 3054 Brittle bone disease. See Osteogenesis imperfecta Brittle diabetes. See Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus Broad-leaved plantain. See Plantain Broad spectrum antibiotics for acute lymphangitis, I:47 for infectious arthritis, III:1820 for prostatitis, IV:2741 stool fats and, IV:3173 Broad spectrum sunscreen, IV:3220 Broca’s aphasia, I:333, I:334 Broccoli, vitamin B6 in, V:3513 Broken teeth. See Tooth fractures Bromelain for autoimmune diseases, I:424 for cluster headache, II:825 for costochondritis, II:940 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 Bromocriptine for acromegaly, I:34 for amenorrhea, I:146 with breastfeeding, III:1943 with estrogens, III:1670–1671 for galactorrhea, III:1376 for Parkinson disease, I:296, 297 for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 Brompheniramine for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:118, 277, 278 Bronchi in ARDS, I:67 in asthma, I:380 COPD and, II:809 in interstitial lung diseases, III:1773 in laryngitis, III:1957 with lung transplantation, III:2055 obstruction of (See Bronchoconstriction) smoking and, II:809 Bronchial asthma. See Asthma Bronchial biopsy, III:1589 Bronchial compression. See Bronchoconstriction Bronchial constriction. See Bronchoconstriction Bronchial drainage, for cystic fibrosis, II:989 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Bronchial lavage. See Bronchoalveolar lavage Bronchial obstruction. See Bronchoconstriction Bronchial tubes in bronchiectasis, I:596 tumor of bronchiectasis from, I:596 carcinoid tumors and, IV:2343 Bronchiectasis, I:596–597 from ABPA, I:107–108 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 Bronchioles in asthma, I:380 in emphysema, II:809, 1172 in extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1716 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2635 Bronchitis, I:598, II:809–812 with anti-insomnia agents, I:283 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 with benzodiazepines, I:467 with beta blockers, I:476 bronchodilators for, I:600 byssinosis and, I:622 cephalosporins for, II:692 from Chagas’ disease, II:728 chest physical therapy for, II:745 cor pulmonale with, II:917 cough from, II:941 with cough suppressants, II:944 with emphysema (See Chronic obstructive lung disease) erythromycins for, II:1232 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 with guaifenesin, II:1254 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 hemoptysis from, III:1589 industrial, COPD and, II:809 with lung diseases, III:2051 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 with measles, III:2139 with motion sickness, III:2219 myrtle for, I:349 from nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 pneumothorax from, IV:2641 pulmonary hypertension from, IV:2785 from Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3063 sulfonamides for, IV:3216 tests for, IV:2783 wheezing from, V:3554 Bronchitis, I:597–600 Bronchoalveolar lavage for aspergillosis, I:375 for extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1717 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for PAP, IV:2776 for sarcoidosis, IV:2941 Bronchoconstriction 3681 Bronchoconstriction with nasal packing, IV:2314 with PSP, IV:2721 rescue (See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation) with RMSF, IV:2910 for stress reduction, IV:3189, 3191 stridor and, IV:3193 techniques (See Breathing exercises) Breathing difficulty from calcium channel blockers, II:628 from decongestants, II:1012 from deviated septum, II:1045 from food poisoning, II:1355, 1356 from gammaglobulin, III:1391 from nasal trauma, IV:2317 from ondansetron, II:644 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 from scoliosis, IV:2973 from shellfish poisoning, II:1335 tracheotomy for, V:3352 Breathing exercises for acute stress disorder, I:49 for amenorrhea, III:2172 for atelectasis, I:391 in ayurvedic medicine, I:428 in chest physical therapy, II:745 for childbirth, II:761 for COPD, II:811 for emphysema, II:1174 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1429 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 for insomnia, III:1845, IV:3092 after lung surgery, III:2054 for mood disorders, III:2217 for nephrectomy, IV:2332 for PTSD, IV:2686 for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 for speech disorders, IV:3124 for spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 for stress, IV:3186 after surgery, III:1427 during traction, V:3358 Breathing techniques for fatigue, II:1297 for hatha yoga, III:1513, 1514 qigong and, IV:2799 for Tai chi, V:3237 for yoga, V:3595 Breathing tubes. See Intubation Breech birth, I:594–596, 595f, II:758 cesarean section for, II:724 with congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 electronic fetal monitoring for, II:1161 Breslow cancer staging, III:2097 Brethine. See Terbutaline Bretylium, for heart attacks, III:1534 Brief psychotic disorder, IV:2765 Bronchoconstriction from anaphylaxis, I:179 from asthma, I:380 atelectasis from, I:390 lung abscess from, III:2039 Bronchodilators, I:600–603 for ABPA, I:108 for allergies, I:119–120 with anticonvulsants, I:255 for asbestosis, I:370 for asthma, I:237, 381 with beta blockers, I:477 for bronchitis, I:599–600 for byssinosis, I:622 for COPD, II:811 for cystic fibrosis, II:988–989 with dicyclomine, I:309 for emphysema, II:1173–1174 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for respiratory acidosis, IV:2861 with respiratory function tests, IV:2784 for RSV, IV:2868–2869 for silicosis, IV:3055 for smoke inhalation, IV:3102 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 for wheezing, V:3554 Bronchogenic carcinoma with ACE test, I:206 bronchoscopy for, I:603 liver function tests for, III:2027 Bronchopneumonia, III:1640 Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, I:118 Bronchopulmonary dysplasia, IV:2706 Bronchoscopy, I:603–605 for atelectasis, I:390 for bronchitis, I:599 for cough, II:942 for hemoptysis, III:1589 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 vs. laryngoscopy, III:1958–1959 for lung abscess, III:2039 for lung biopsy, III:2044 with lung biopsy, III:2040 for lung cancer, III:2048 for PAP, IV:2776 for pleural effusion, IV:2629 for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 for sarcoidosis, IV:2941 for silicosis, IV:3055 for smoke inhalation, IV:3102 for sputum cultures, IV:3150 Bronchospasms, IV:3035 Bronze diabetes. See Hemochromatosis Brooke ileostomy. See Ileostomy Brown lung. See Byssinosis Brown spiders. See Spiders Brucella, I:605 Brucellosis, I:605–606 3682 familial (See Familial Mediterranean fever) lymphadenitis from, III:2064 vs, paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 Bruch’s membrane, IV:2753–2754 Brugada syndrome, II:900 Brugia malayi elephantiasis from, II:1166 filariasis from, II:1330 Brugia timori, II:1166 Bruises, I:607, 607–608 from celiac disease, II:682 from domestic violence, V:3577 St. John’s wort for, IV:3151 from thrombocytopenia, V:3295 See also Contusions Bruisewort. See Comfrey Bruit from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 with renal artery stenosis, IV:2856 Brunfels, Otto, III:1617 Brushing (Dental). See Toothbrushing Bruton’s agammaglobulinemia. See Xlinked agammaglobulinemia Bruxism, I:482, I:608–609 Bryonia. See Wild hops BSE. See Bovine spongiform encephalopathy; Breast self-examination Btk gene, V:3585 Buboes from chancroid, II:729 from lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071 Bubonic plague. See Plague Buckhorn. See Plantain Buck’s skin traction, V:3357 Buckthorn for constipation, II:907 for IBS, III:1867 Budd-Chiari syndrome, I:609–611 Buddhism, vegetarianism and, V:3485 Buddhist qigong. See Qigong Budesonide, for croup, II:960 Buerger’s disease, I:611 amputation from, I:157 gangrene from, III:1393 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 thrombophlebitis from, V:3300 Buffalo grass. See Alfalfa Buffalo herb. See Alfalfa Buffy coat smear, for leukemia, III:1985 Bugbane. See Black cohosh Bulbar muscles, I:165 Bulging fontanelle, IV:3205 Bulimia, I:611–613 amenorrhea from, I:147 in anorexia nervosa, I:211 vs. binge eating disorder, I:481 vs. binge eating disorder, I:481 in children, II:762 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 in gays and lesbians, III:1416 hypokalemia from, III:1740 ipecac and, III:1857, 1859 smoking cessation drugs with, IV:3110 tricyclic antidepressants for, I:258 Bulk, in bowel function, I:565 Bulk producing laxatives, III:1593, 1964 Bull neck, from diphtheria, II:1077 Bullous impetigo. See Impetigo Bull’s eye. See Calendula Bumetanide for edema, II:1088 for heart attacks, III:1534 hyponatremia from, III:1742 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Bumex. See Bumetanide BUN. See Blood urea nitrogen Bundle-branch block, I:613–614 Bundle of His, I:614 Bunion. See Hallux valgus Bunionectomy, I:616 Bunyavirus arbovirus encephalitis from, I:347 hemorrhagic fevers from, III:1591–1592 Bupleuri falcatum. See Chinese thoroughwax Bupleurum chinense. See Chinese thoroughwax Bupronophine, for pain, I:174 Bupropion for ADHD, I:412 for bipolar disorder, I:487 for depression, II:1035 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 for smoking cessation, IV:3109, 3110, 3111 Buproprion hydrochloride, IV:3105 Burch procedure, V:3455 Burdock root. See Burdocks Burdocks for acne, I:26 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for constipation, II:907 for contact dermititis, II:910 for dermatitis, II:1038 for psoriasis, IV:2757 Burgdorfer, Willy, III:2057 Burkholderia cepacia, II:989 Burkitt lymphoma, III:2093 Burns, I:616–620, 617f, 618t acute kidney failure from, I:44 amylase tests for, I:160 antacids and, I:218 ARDS from, I:68 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 sports-related, IV:3145, 3146 Burst suppression, I:444 Buscopan. See Hyoscine butylbromide Bush yaws. See Cutaneous leishmaniasis Bushmaster snake. See Lachesis Buspar. See Buspirone Buspirone for anxiety, I:231–233, 320 for central nervous system depression, II:689 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for paraphilias, IV:3019 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for smoking cessation, IV:3109, 3110 Busse-Buschke disease. See Cryptococcosis BusSpar. See Buspirone Butalbital, for tension headache, V:3255 Butamben, for local anesthesia, I:190 Butazolidin. See Phenylbutazone Butcher’s broom, for hemorrhoids, III:1594 Butenafine, for fungal infections, I:270 Butoconazole, for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Buttercup, poisoning from, IV:2644 Butyl nitrate, III:1416 Butyrophenones, for psychosis, I:301 Buzzing sounds. See Sounds BV. See Bacterial vaginosis Byers, Dwight, IV:2842 Byers International Institute of Reflexology, IV:2842 Bypass operation. See Coronary artery bypass Byrenium. See Tiamterene Byssinosis, I:622–623, III:1717, 2051 C C. jejuni. See Campylobacter jejuni C-reactive protein with juvenile arthritis, III:1894 with PID, IV:2523 C-section. See Cesarean section C1 esterase test, II:874 C3 complement test, II:874 C4 complement test, II:874 C282Y gene, III:1573 CA-15-3 antigen, V:3412 CA-19-9 antigen, V:3412–3413 CA-27.29 antigen, V:3412–3413 CA-125 antigen, V:3412–3413 CA-125 assay, IV:2441 Cabbage, V:3513 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 CABG. See Coronary artery bypass Cachexia. See Malnutrition Cactus grandiflorus, for ischemia, III:1871 Cadmium with kidney cancer, III:1909, 1911 kidney damage from, I:473 lung diseases from, III:2051 poisoning, III:1560–1561 toxicity, III:2194 Cadmium poisoning, II:1291 Caephalis ipecacuanha, III:1858 Cafe au lait spots. See Ephelides Cafergot. See Ergotamine Caffedrine. See Caffeine Caffeine, II:625–627 abuse of, IV:3207 aging and, I:72 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antimigraine agents, I:289 anxiety and, I:318 anxiety disorder from, I:323 arrhythmias from, I:353 atrial ectopic beats from, I:406 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 with cold sores, II:846 as CSN stimulant, II:691 with decongestants, II:1012 dizziness from, II:1095 drug metabolism with, II:1102 dry mouth from, II:1109 dyspepsia from, II:1118 with electroencephalography, II:1152 with epididymitis, II:1219 with erythromycins, II:1233 fatigue and, II:1297 fibroadenoma and, II:1322 fibrocystic breast and, II:1325 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 gastroenteritis and, III:1409 vs. generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 heartburn from, III:1553 hives from, III:1643 with hyperthyroidism, III:1725 indigestion and, III:1813, 1815 in infertility, III:1833 insomnia from, III:1844–1845 liver cirrhosis and, II:817 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 with Meniere’s disease, III:2152 migraine and, III:2187, 2188, 2189 with mitral valve prolapse, III:2208 onychomycosis and, IV:2391 with opioid analgesics, I:177 palpitations from, IV:2465 pregnancy and, IV:2698, 2712 recurrent miscarriages and, IV:2836 with restless legs syndrome, IV:2872 sleep disorders from, IV:3089 3683 Caffeine aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 from catheter ablation, II:680 with chest physical therapy, II:745 with complement deficiencies, II:874 cooling treatments for, II:914–915 corticotropin levels and, I:65 with cross infection, III:1674 debridement for, II:1007 from defibrillation, II:1016 with dermatitis, II:1037 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154, 1155 enteral nutrition for, V:3401 hair transplantation for, III:1499 hyperbaric oxygen therapy for, III:1837, IV:2451 hypophosphatemia from, IV:2585 hypotension from, III:1752 keloids from, III:1903 from laser surgery, III:1962 lavender for, I:349 leeches for, III:1971 liver function tests for, III:2026 local anesthesia for, I:190 malnutrition with, III:2104 from maxillofacial trauma, III:2136 with melioidosis, III:2150 neutrophilia from, III:1993 pain from, IV:2459 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2744 pulmonary artery catheterization for, IV:2776 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 recompression treatment for, IV:2826 rehabilitation for, IV:2847 skin grafts for, IV:3069 smoke inhalation and, IV:3102 spurious polycythemia from, IV:2982 St. John’s wort for, IV:3151 staphylococcal infections from, IV:3158 topical antibiotics for, I:245 from ultraviolet light treatment, V:3436 wilderness medicine for, V:3561 Burping, for colic, II:847 Burr holes, for subdural hematoma, IV:3205 Bursa, synovial fluid analysis for, III:1889 Bursitis, I:620–622 with bunions, I:615 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 Caffeine as tension headache trigger, V:3255 with ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 CAG repeats, III:1682–1683 CagA, III:1566 CAGE questionnaire for alcoholism, I:97 for substance abuse, IV:3209 CAH. See Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Cai feng zhen zhu an chuang wan, I:27 Caisson disease. See Decompression sickness Calamine for chickenpox, II:751 for contact dermatitis, I:121, II:910 for fifth disease, II:1329 for hemorrhoids, I:275 for pityriasis rosea, IV:2609 for shingles, IV:3032 for skin lesions, IV:3077 for stings, I:501 for sunburn, IV:3218 Calan. See Verapamil Calcaneous, spurs of, III:1562 Calcarea phosphorica, for bunions, I:616 Calciferol. See Vitamin D Calcification from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 breast, II:1324 with echinococcosis, II:1128 with electrolyte disorders, II:1156 skull x-rays for, IV:3083 from vitamin D deficiency, V:3515 Calcimar. See Calcitonin Calcitonin, I:542, 543, 544 for hypercalcemia, III:1698 in hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 for osteoporosis, III:2197, IV:2426–2427 for Paget’s disease, IV:2456 tests for, III:2237 Calcitriol, for psoriasis, IV:2757 Calcium in atherosclerosis, I:393 in bipolar disorder, I:486 in bones, I:544 constipation from, II:906 deposits (See Calcium deposits) diabetes insipidus from, II:1047 in diarrhea, I:265 in diets (See Dietary calcium) in electrolyte disorders, II:1153–1156 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 in foods, III:1696 in hypercalcemia, III:1696–1698 in hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 hypocalcemia and, III:1731 3684 with kidney cancer, III:1909 kidney function tests for, III:1913 with lactose intolerance, II:650 with lipase test, III:2002 loss, from steroids, I:382 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 metabolism of, IV:2496 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 muscle spasms and cramps, III:2260, 2261 in nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 parathyroid hormone test and, IV:2494–2495 in partial thromboplastin time, IV:2508 phenytoin and, IV:2577 regulation by bone disorder agents, I:542 by parathyroid glands, IV:2497 from sarcoidosis, IV:2941 toxicity, III:2194–2195 for vegetarians, V:3487 vitamin D deficiency and, V:3515 in Wolman disease, III:2005 Calcium bicarbonate, III:1732 Calcium carbonate, IV:3173 Calcium channel blockers, II:627–629 for achalasia, I:20 for acrocyanosis, I:32 for angina pectoris, I:195 with antimalarials, I:288 for arrhythmias, I:353 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:408 with beta blockers, I:477 for bipolar disorder, I:488 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 constipation from, II:906 for coronary heart disease, II:931 with digitalis, II:1074 for headache, III:1524 for heart failure, III:1540 for heart valve disease, III:1551 heartburn from, III:1553 with hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 for hypertension, I:279, III:1722 for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 for ischemia, III:1870 for migraines, I:289, III:2189 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785 Calcium chloride, for hypocalcemia, III:1732 Calcium deficiency, III:2190–2193 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 from hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 with vitamin D deficiency, V:3515 Calcium deposits aortic valve stenosis from, I:329 in bursitis, I:620 heart valve diseases from, V:3474 technetium heart scan for, V:3246 from TORCH syndrome, V:3339 Calcium disodium edetate. See Edetate calcium disodium Calcium EDTA. See Edetate calcium disodium Calcium gluconate for hyperphosphatemia, IV:2585 for hypocalcemia, III:1732 for magnesium poisoning, III:2079 Calcium lactate, for hypocalcemia, III:1732 Calcium phosphate deposits, III:2194 toxicity, III:2195 Calcium salts as antacids, I:218 in arteriovenous malformations, I:357 Calcium stones kidney stones as, III:1917, 1919 from medullary sponge kidney, III:2149 Calcium sulfate, in bone grafts, I:544 Calcium sulphide, for laryngitis, III:1958 Calcium supplements. See Dietary calcium Calcofluor stain, for mucormycosis, III:2232 Caldesene Medicated Powder. See Naftifine Calendual officinalis. See Calendula Calendula for athlete’s foot, I:399 for balanitis, I:440 for burns, I:619 for canker sores, II:648 for chickenpox, II:751 for contact dermatitis, I:121, II:910 for corns and calluses, II:924 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for dermatitis, II:1038 for diaper rash, II:1063 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for mumps, III:2256 for PID, IV:2523 for stomatitis, IV:3171 for tonsillitis, V:3328 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 Calendula officinalis. See Calendula Caliciviruses, gastroenteritis from, III:1408 California buckthorn. See Buckthorn California encephalitis, I:347, II:1178 California Verbal Learning Test for learning disorders, III:1969 Calisthenics. See Exercise Calluses, I:615, II:923–925 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with cellulitis, II:684 cerebrospinal fluid analysis for, II:706, 709 chemotherapy for, II:740–743 chest drainage therapy for, II:743 coccydynia from, II:836 colonic irrigation and, II:854 cryoglobulin test for, II:961 with cyclosporiasis, II:981 defined, II:631–632 delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1019 with dermatomyositis, III:2295 diagnosis of, II:633–634 EGD for, II:1246 embolism from, I:355, II:1169 enteral nutrition for, V:3400 environmental causes, I:490 enzyme therapy for, II:1214 esophageal (See Esophageal cancer) ESR and, II:1231 ethnic differences in, III:2199, 2200, 2201 fibrin split products and, II:1319–1320 with fifth disease, II:1328 frequency of death from, II:633t gallium scan for, III:1383, 1384 gangrene from, III:1393 gastrectomy for, III:1397 gay and lesbian health and, III:1414 from gemfibrozil, II:790, 791 genetic causes, I:492 genetic counseling for, III:1432 genetic testing for, III:1432, 1436–1437, 1436–1438 with gout drugs, III:1480 healing imagery for, III:1491 HRT and, III:1671–1672, 1673 from hydatidiform mole, III:1684 hypercalcemia from, III:1697, 1698 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 hypnotherapy for, III:1730 hypotension from, III:1752 from immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 immunotherapy for, III:1791 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 internuclear ophthalmoplegia with, IV:2395 itching from, III:1874 jaundice from, III:1882 jaw fixation for, III:1885 joint biopsy for, III:1888 kidney stones from, III:1917 with kidney transplantation, III:1919 kyphosis from, III:1932 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1939, 1940, 1941 laser surgery for, III:1960 Legionnaires’ disease with, III:1972 leukocytosis from, III:1993 with listeriosis, III:2012 liver, III:1573 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 after liver transplantation, III:2030 with low cholesterol, II:794 lung abscess with, III:2039 lymphocyte tests for, III:2068 with lymphocytopenia, III:2070 with manual lymph drainage, II:1136 in men, III:2164, 2166 menorrhagia from, III:2170 from moles, III:2210, 2211 neutropenia from, IV:2353 from obesity, IV:2374 opioids for, I:175 pain from, IV:2459, 2460 pancreatic (See Pancreatic cancer) paracentesis for, IV:2489–2490 paresthesia from, IV:2365 pericardial effusion from, IV:2536 pericarditis from, IV:2538 peripheral neuropathy with, IV:2550, 2554 PET scan for, IV:2677 from phytoestrogens, IV:2711 with plastic surgery, IV:2621 pleural biopsy for, IV:2627–2628 pleural effusion from, IV:2628 pleurisy from, IV:2631 with polymyositis, III:2295 premature menopause from, IV:2702 prevention of, II:637 prognosis for, II:637 with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 protein components test for, IV:2745 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2743 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 from radiation injuries, IV:2808–2809 rashes from, IV:2821 rectal (See Rectal cancer) rehabilitation for, IV:2846 retinoblastoma screening, IV:2888 sciatica from, IV:2963 from sclerotherapy, IV:2970 with septic shock, IV:3005 shingles from, I:303 skin (See Skin cancer) skin lesions from, IV:3075 small intestine biopsy for, IV:3095 from space travel, I:428 splenectomy for, IV:3138 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3156 from STDs, IV:3020 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3201 superior vena cava syndrome with, IV:3221–3222 T lymphocytes and, III:1988, 1990–1991, 2092 with toxoplasmosis, V:3349 3685 Cancer Caloric intake with obesity surgery, IV:2379 in starvation, IV:3161 Calpain, in muscular dystrophy, III:2262 Calymmatobacterium granulomatis, III:1483 Campath. See Alemtuxumab Campbell de Morgan spots. See Cherry angiomas Camphor for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1648 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for physical allergy, IV:2592 for prickly heat, IV:2717 Campylobacter, II:629 gastroenteritis from, III:1408 Guillain-Barré syndrome from, III:1492 travelers diarrhea from, V:3379 Campylobacter fetus, II:630 Campylobacter jejuni in food poisoning, II:1354 Guillain-Barré syndrome from, IV:2549, 2552 Campylobacteriosis, II:629–631 Canaliculi, in dacryocystitis, II:1003 Cananga odorata. See Ylang ylang Cancer, II:631–638, 365t acidosis from, III:2179 acupuncture and, I:40 aging and, I:69 from alcoholism, I:96 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127, 128 amputation for, I:157 anal (See Anal cancer) anemia from, I:182 aneurysmectomy and, I:193 with anorectal fistula, I:210 ascites from, I:371, 373 ataxia-telangiectasia and, I:388 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 Bartholin’s gland cyst from, I:449, 450 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 bilateral cingulotomy for, IV:2770 bile duct, I:477–479 bio-oxidative therapies for, IV:2450 blood clots from, III:1800 blood transfusions and, V:3367, 3368 bone marrow aspiration for, I:549 bone marrow transplantation for, I:550 brain (See Brain cancer) Campylobacter and, II:630 carcinoembryonic antigen and, II:653 CAT scan for (See Computed tomography scan) from celiac disease, II:682 Cancer transhepatic biliary catheterization for, V:3370 treatment of, II:634–637 (See also Cancer therapy) tumor markers of, V:3412–3415 tumor removal for, V:3415–3417 ulcer surgery and, V:3428 vasopressin from, III:1743 vegetarianism and, V:3487 Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3543–3547 Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and, V:3570, 3571 in women, V:3576 Cancer antigens, as tumor markers, V:3412–3413 Cancer metastasis acid phosphatase test for, I:23 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 bladder, I:508 bone, IV:2942–2944, 2945 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 brain, I:568–569 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 from carcinoid tumors, IV:2343–2344 CAT scan for, II:877 chemotherapy for, II:640, 641, II:740–743 cholestasis from, II:783 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 eye, II:1260, V:3587 with gastrinomas, III:1403 of head and neck cancer, III:1517 in-transit, III:2096 kidney, III:1910 liver, III:2019 liver biopsy for, III:2017 lymph nodes and, III:2062 from lymphomas, III:2092 mediastinoscopy for, III:2040, 2143 with melanoma, III:2095 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2237 with myxoma, III:2306 with neuroblastomas, IV:2340–2342 pancreatic, IV:2469 with pancreatic cancer, IV:2475–2476 parotid, IV:2504 with plastic surgery, IV:2620 pleural effusion from, V:3284 from prostate cancer, IV:2730 skin, IV:3066, 3067 spinal cord, III:2031, 2284 tumor removal and, V:3415, 3417 uric acid tests for, V:3442 with ventricular assist devices, V:3497 3686 Cancer recurrence with lumpectomy, III:2038 after mastectomy, III:2130–2131 with melanoma, III:2099 with multiple myeloma, III:2242 from parotid cancer, IV:2505 with penile cancer, IV:2530 with prostate cancer, IV:2735 Cancer staging for anal cancer, I:170–171 Ann Arbor system, III:1646 for brain tumors, I:569–570 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976–977 for endometrial cancer, II:1190 for esophageal cancer, II:1241 for gallbladder cancer, III:1380 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645–1646 with kidney cancer, III:1910 laparoscopy for, III:1948 for laryngeal cancer, III:1952 with liver cancer, III:2020 for lung cancer, III:2044, 2048 with lymphomas, III:2093 for MALT lymphomas, III:2108 with mastectomy, III:2128 mediastinoscopy for, III:2143 for melanoma, III:2097–2098 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2280 for neuroblastoma, IV:2341 for ovarian cancer, IV:2440–2441 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472, 2475–2476 for penile cancer, IV:2530 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2579 for prostate cancer, IV:2729, 2732 for sarcomas, IV:2943–2944 for skin cancer, IV:3067 for testicular cancer, V:3258 for thymoma, V:3302–3303 for thyroid cancer, V:3307 tumor removal for, V:3415 for vulvar cancer, V:3537–3538, 3565–3566 Cancer surgery, laparoscopic, III:1947, 1948, 1949 Cancer therapy with anticancer drugs, I:246–249 definitive, II:638–641 palliative, II:641–642 for sarcomas, IV:2944–2945 supportive, II:642–645 Cancer vaccines, II:636 Cancernic miasm. See Miasms Cancerweed. See Sage Cancidas. See Capsofungin Candelberry. See Bayberry Candesartan, for hypertension, I:279–281 Candida otitis externa from, IV:2431 Candida albicans balanitis from, I:439 candidiasis from, II:645 cross infection from, III:1674, 1676 in delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1019 KOH test for, III:1929 nail removal for, IV:2309 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 Candida vulvovaginitis. See Vulvovaginal candidiasis Candidal dermatitis, II:1062 Candidal vaginitis. See Vulvovaginal candidiasis Candidiasis, II:645–647 with AIDS, I:76 from antibiotics, III:2060 from genital herpes, III:1441 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 KOH test for, III:1929 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 with polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 proctitis from, IV:2719 from SCID, IV:3009 sitz bath for, IV:3062 systemic antifungal drugs for, I:267–270 Candlewick plant. See Mullein Canes. See Assistive technology devices Canine blastomycosis, I:513 Canine Recombinant lyme, III:2060 Canker sores, II:647–648, IV:3170 vs. cold sores, II:845 laser surgery for, III:1960 local anesthesia for, I:190 Cankerwort. See Dandelion Cannabinoids, IV:3206 Cannabinoids, III:2121 Cannabis. See Marijuana Cantharis, for burns, I:619 CAP. See Central auditory processing Capillaries in allergic purpura, I:110 in arteriovenous malformations, I:357 in cyanosis, II:979 damage to, II:1183 in idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 Capillary hemangioma, I:494, 495, 496 Capon’s tail. See Valerian Capoten. See Captopril Capotril, cholestasis from, II:784 Capsaicin for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 for neuralgia, IV:2340 for osteoarthritis, IV:2999 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with SSRIs, I:258 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:259, 261 for trigeminal neuralgia, V:3391 Carbapenems, I:241 Carbex. See Selegeline Carbidopa for Parkinson disease, I:295–296 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 Carbo vegetalis, for indigestion, III:1814 Carbohydrates, IV:2367 in acidosis, III:2179 ADHD and, I:411 aldolase and, I:99 amylase for, I:160 artificial (See Artificial sweeteners) in Atkin’s diet, I:400–401 in breast milk, III:1942 in diets, III:1708, 2105 in gestational diabetes, III:1447 glucose from, III:1734 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 intolerance of, II:649–651 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2085 in nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 for PMS, IV:2711 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 urinalysis for, V:3446 Carbon dioxide in atelectasis, I:390 from bicarbonate metabolism, II:1159 blood gas analysis for, I:527 from cholecystectomy, II:778 in hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 with nasal packing, IV:2314 from pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 with pulmonary embolism, IV:2780 in respiratory acidosis, IV:2861 in respiratory alkalosis, IV:2862 in respiratory insufficiency, IV:2865 for retinal artery occlusion, IV:2875 Carbon dioxide laser. See Laser surgery Carbon dioxide poisoning hyperbaric oxygen therapy for, III:1837, 1841 vs. inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 Carbon disulfide, peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552 Carbon monoxide cyanosis from, II:980 delirium from, II:1021 in respiratory function tests, IV:2784 Carbon monoxide detectors, II:652 Carbon monoxide poisoning, II:651–653, IV:2643 with burns, I:618 vs. inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 movement disorders from, III:2221 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Parkinson disease from, I:295 psychosis from, IV:2766 recompression treatment for, IV:2826 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 from smoke inhalation, IV:3102 vegetative state from, V:3488 Carbon tetrachloride poisoning aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 kidney damage from, IV:2337 Carbonated beverages dyspepsia from, II:1118 hiccups from, III:1631 Carbonic acid, II:1159 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors for glaucoma, III:1459 for retinal artery occlusion, IV:2875 Carboxyhemoglobin, CO poisoning and, II:651 Carbuncle, I:13, 536–538, IV:3157 Carcinoembryonic antigen test, II:653–654 Carcinoembryonic antigens, IV:2829–2830 in testicular cancer, V:3258 as tumor marker, V:3412–3413 Carcinogens cancer and, II:632, 637 from smoking, IV:3108 Carcinoid tumor, IV:2343–2344 Carcinoma, II:632 adrenocortical, I:60 hepatocellular (See Hepatocellular carcinoma) pelvic exam for, IV:2519 in situ (See Squamous cell carcinoma) skin lesions from, IV:3075 See also Cancer Cardene. See Nicardipine Cardiac arrest. See Sudden cardiac death Cardiac arrhythmia. See Arrhythmia Cardiac blood pool scan, II:654–655 Cardiac catheterization. See Heart catheterization Cardiac diseases. See Heart diseases Cardiac enzyme studies, V:3246 Cardiac failure. See Heart failure Cardiac mapping, II:1163, 1164 Cardiac markers. See Troponin test Cardiac monitor. See Heart monitoring Cardiac murmurs. See Heart murmurs Cardiac output in athletic heart syndrome, I:400 after heart transplantation, III:1548 MUGA scan for, III:2233 Cardiac pacemaker. See Pacemaker Cardiac rehabilitation, II:659–660 3687 Cardiac rehabilitation for pain, IV:2460 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 for psoriasis, IV:2757 Capsella bursa-pastoris. See Shepherd’s purse Capsicum frutescens. See Cayenne Capsofungin, for systemic fungal infection, I:267 Capsula glomeruli. See Bowman’s capsule Capsular contracture from breast implants, I:586 from breast reconstruction, I:589–590 Captopril with diuretics, II:1090 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypertension, I:203, 204, 279–281 for kidney disease, I:203, 204 with penicillins, IV:2529 with plasma renin activity, IV:2618 serum sickness from, IV:3008 Caput medusae, with alcoholism, I:97 Car accidents. See Traffic accidents Car emissions. See Vehicle emissions Car seat safety, II:765–766 Car sickness. See Motion sickness Carafate. See Sucralfate Caraway, for anemia, I:184 Carbamate overdose, II:1104 Carbamate poisoning, III:1842 Carbamazepam, for hiccups, III:1632 Carbamazepine for ADHD, I:412 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 with barbiturates, I:447 for bipolar disorder, I:487, 488 for borderline disorder, IV:2566 with bupropion, IV:3111 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 cholestasis from, II:784 for conduct disorder, II:884 for convulsions, I:253 for dementia, II:1026 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 for Fabry’s disease, III:2005 with grapefruit juice, II:1102 for mania, III:2113 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 for neuralgia, IV:2339 with opioid analgesics, I:178 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 for pain, IV:2460, 2463 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 with prochlorperazine, I:294 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for seizures, IV:2986 Cardiac rehabilitation after coronary artery bypass grafting, II:928 for coronary heart disease, II:932 exercise for, II:1249, 1251 for heart failure, III:1539 with heart valve repair, III:1550 Cardiac shunts. See Ventricular shunt Cardiac tamponade, II:660–661, IV:2538, 2540 from heart transplantation, III:1549 pericardiocentesis for, IV:2536, 2537 Cardiac toxicity. See Heart damage Cardiac transplantation. See Heart transplantation Cardiac troponins. See Troponin test Cardiac ultrasonography, V:3269 Cardialgia. See Heartburn Cardiodynia. See Heartburn Cardiogenic shock, IV:3034 Cardiomyopathy. See Myocardial diseases Cardiopulmonary bypass machine. See Heart-lung machine Cardiopulmonary resuscitation, II:661–665, 663f in basic life support, II:663 for burns, I:618 for children, II:765 for CO poisoning, II:652 for cold-water drowning, II:915, 1005 with defibrillation, II:1015 for fainting, II:1281 for gas embolism, III:1396 for heart attacks, III:1533 with Heimlich maneuver, III:1564 with hypothermia, III:1755 with laser surgery, III:1960 in life support, III:1999 for near drowing, V:3563 for near drowning, IV:2327, 2328 for sudden cardiac death, IV:3212 for ventricular fibrillation, V:3500 in wilderness medicine, V:3560 for wounds, V:3583 Cardioquin. See Quinidine Cardiothoracic surgery. See Thoracic surgery Cardiovascular diseases Alexander technique for, I:103 anoscopy and, I:214 aromatherapy for, I:348 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:302 blood-viscosity reducing agents for, I:520 dyspnea from, IV:3035, 3036 echocardiography for, II:1129 ethnic differences in, III:2199, 2200, 2201 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 foot care with, II:1357 3688 hatha yoga for, III:1513 meditation for, III:2148 from smoking, IV:3104 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 traction and, V:3358 in women, V:3576 See also Heart diseases Cardiovascular exercises. See Aerobic exercises Cardiovascular syphilis, IV:3227–3228 Cardiovascular system in Addison’s disease, I:53 with barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 with beriberi, I:470 in diabetic foot infections, II:1054 estrogen and, III:1737 monitoring of, IV:2554 in Raynaud disease, IV:2823–2825 scleroderma and, IV:2967 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052, 3054 in therapeutic touch, V:3282 during traction, V:3358 Cardioversion, II:665–666 See also Defibrillation Cardioverter defibrillators. See Implantable defibrillators Cardiplant. See Hawthorn Cardizem. See Diltiazem Cardura. See Doxazosin Cardus marianum. See Milk thistle Career woman’s disease. See Endometriosis Caregivers Alzheimer’s disease and, I:137, 138–139 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and, I:166 in child abuse, II:756 for dementia patients, II:1026 in elderly abuse, I:17, 18 Carisoprodol, as muscle relaxant, III:2259 Carmustine for melanoma, III:2099 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 Carotene, in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 Carotid arteries in aortic coarctation, II:830 in atherosclerosis, I:394 in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, II:662 in carotid sinus massage, II:666 endarterectomy of, II:1180 in TIA, V:3371 Carotid endarterectomy, II:1180, V:3372 Carotid pulse, II:662, II:663, II:664 Carotid sinus massage, II:666–667, IV:2505 Carpal tunnel syndrome, II:667–669, 668f with amyloidosis, I:162 arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 paralysis from, IV:2491 paresthesia from, IV:2365 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2550 Raynaud disease from, IV:2823 rolfing for, IV:2912 from scleroderma, IV:2966 Carrier testing. See Genetic testing Carrion, Daniel, I:451 Carrion’s disease. See Bartonellosis Cartelol, I:475 Cartilage in achondroplasia, I:21 arthroscopy for, I:364 chondrosarcomas of, IV:2942 in costochondritis, II:940–941 in cutis laxa, II:978 fetal growth retardation and, III:1852 injuries to arthrography for, I:359 from synovial fluid analysis, III:1889 lesions, from leishmaniasis, III:1975 in nasal trauma, IV:2317 in osteoarthritis, IV:2412, 2996 in osteochondrosis, IV:2416 in relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854–2855 in rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2899–2900 in septoplasty, IV:3006 Cartilage transplantation, IV:2414 Carvedilol, for hypertension, I:279–281 Casanthranol, as laxative, III:1964 Cascara, as laxative, III:1963–1964 Cassia. See Senna Castile soap, for enemas, II:1200 Castor bean poisoning, IV:2644 Castor oil with bisacodyl, I:563 for constipation, II:907 for gastroenteritis, III:1410 as laxative, III:1964 for PID, IV:2523 before stool culture, IV:3172 before stool O & P test, IV:3174 Castration, IV:2773, V:3261 Casts for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for fractures, II:1361, 1365 for immobilization, III:1780–1781 for osteochondrosis, IV:2416 with spinal instrumentation, IV:3134 urinalysis for, V:3445 Casual plasma glucose test. See Blood glucose tests GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 Catheterization aortic dissection from, I:327 arteriovenous fistula from, I:356 balloon (See Balloon dilatation) for catecholamines tests, II:677 for chemotherapy, II:741 cross infection from, III:1674–1675, 1676 gas embolism from, III:1396 heart (See Heart catheterization) in homeostasis monitoring, III:2000 in hysterosonography, III:1769 indwelling (See Indwelling catheters) infectious arthritis from, III:1819 intermittent (See Intermittent catheterization) with Peyronie’s disease, IV:2572 in plasmapheresis, IV:2619 pulmonary artery (See Pulmonary artery catheterization) for pulmonary valve stenosis, IV:2788 radiopaque, for TEF, V:3352 sepsis from, IV:3004 septic shock from, IV:3005 staphylococcal infections from, IV:3157 ureteral, V:3439 Cationic molecules, II:1216 Cats asthma from, I:383, III:2050 bites from (See Bites and stings) cutaneous larvae migrans from, II:974–975 plague and, IV:2616 rat-bite fever from, IV:2822 toxoplasmosis from, V:3348 Cat’s cry syndrome. See Cri du chat syndrome Cattle anthrax in, I:223 E. coli in, II:1235, 1236 tapeworm infections in, V:3239 Cauda equina in disk removal, II:1081 tumors, low back pain from, III:2031 Caulophyllum thalictroides. See Blue cohosh Causalgia. See Reflex sympathetic dystrophy Causality theory, IV:2959 Causticum for bed-wetting, I:455 for burns, I:619 for laryngitis, III:1958 Cautery with cholecystectomy, II:777 laser, III:1959, IV:2542 for Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 perforated septum from, IV:2535 Caverject. See Alprostadil Cavernosal fibrosis, IV:3052 Cavernous hemangioma, I:494, 495, 496, IV:2395 Cavities, dental. See Dental caries Cayenne for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for mumps, III:2256 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for tennis elbow, V:3253 CBC. See Complete blood count CBCL. See Child Behavior Checklist CCNU, for brain tumors, I:572 CCR5 gene, I:75 CD4 cells. See T-lymphocytes CD52 antigen, I:102 CDC. See Centers for Disease Control and Prevention CDD. See Childhood disintegrative disorder CDDP. See Cisplatin CDI. See Child Depression Inventory CDKN2A gene, III:2096 CEA. See Carcinoembryonic antigen; Carcinoembryonic antigens Ceclor. See Cefaclor Cefaclor for bacterial infections, II:692 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 serum sickness from, IV:3008 Cefadroxil, for bacterial infections, II:692 Cefamandole, with thrombolytic therapy, V:3300 Cefazolin antibiotic-associated colitis from, I:238 for bacterial infections, II:692 Cefixime for bacterial infections, II:693 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 Cefmetazole, I:241–242 Cefobid. See Cefoperazone Cefoperazone, I:241–242, V:3300 Cefotan. See Cefotetan Cefotaxime, I:241 for epiglottitis, II:1220 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for meningococcemia, III:2158 Cefotetan, I:241, V:3300 Cefoxitin, I:241 for anaerobic infections, I:168 for bacterial infections, II:693 Cefprozil, for bacterial infections, II:693 Ceftaz. See Ceftazidime Ceftazidime for bacterial infections, II:693 3689 Ceftazidime CAT scan. See Computed tomography scan Cat-scratch disease, I:206, 207, 498, II:669–671 bacillary angiomatosis from, I:434 vs. bartonellosis, I:451 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 Cat-scratch fever. See Cat-scratch disease Cataplexy, IV:2311, 3087 Catapres. See Clonidine Cataract, II:673–675, 674 from acoustic neuroma, I:28 age-related, II:673, IV:2997, 2999 amblyopia from, I:141 with anticancer agents, I:248 antioxidants for, I:70 from bone marrow transplantation, I:554 from diabetes mellitus, II:1052 with Down syndrome, II:1099 eye examination for, II:1264 with G6PD, III:1464 glaucoma from, III:1458 from hypocalcemia, III:1732 laser surgery for, III:1960 from macular degeneration, III:2076 from Marfan syndrome, III:2116 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 nystagmus from, IV:2372 after radial keratotomy, IV:2805 from steroids, I:382, III:1774, V:3462 trabeculectomy and, V:3351 ultrasonography for, II:1258 from uveitis, V:3462–3463 visual impairment from, V:3510 from vitrectomy, V:3528 Cataract extraction, II:671–672, II:674, IV:2586, 2587, 2999 Cataract surgery. See Cataract extraction Catatonia, I:187, II:675–677 Catatonic excitement, II:675–676 Catatonic schizophrenia, IV:2958–2959 Catatonic stupor, II:675–676 Catch 22 disorder. See DiGeorge’s syndrome Catecholamines alpha1-adrenergic blockers and, I:129 tests for, II:677–678, IV:2578 Cathartic colon, from laxatives, III:1964 Cathartics. See Laxatives Catheter ablation, II:678–681 for arrhythmias, I:353–354 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:408 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1163, 1164, 1165 for paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, IV:2506 Ceftazidime for melioidosis, III:2151 for neonatal meningitis, II:1237 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 for vibriosis, V:3507 Ceftin. See Cefuroxime Ceftizoxime, I:241 Ceftriaxone, I:241–242 for chancroid, II:730 for conjunctivitis, II:903 for epiglottitis, II:1220 for gonorrhea, III:1473, IV:2819 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for Lyme disease, III:2060 for meningococcemia, III:2158 for syphilis, IV:3229 Cefuroxime for bacterial infections, II:693 for clenched fist injury, II:821 Cefzil. See Cefprozil Celebrex. See Celecoxib Celecoxib for pain, I:174 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Celery, for amenorrhea, III:2172 Celery seed, for bladder stones, I:511 Celiac angiography, I:198 Celiac disease, II:681–684 Blood urea nitrogen test for, I:535 with carbohydrate intolerance, II:649 diarrhea from, II:1065 gallstones from, III:1388 laxatives and, III:1964 malabsorption syndromes and, III:2086 pernicious anemia from, IV:2558 with peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 small intestine biopsy for, IV:3095 stool fat test for, IV:3173 vitamin A deficiency with, V:3512 vitamin K deficiency with, V:3519 zinc deficiency with, III:2191 Celiac ganglion nerve block, III:1380 Celiac sprue. See Celiac disease Cell metabolism, blood gas analysis for, I:527 Cell nucleus, in muscular dystrophy, III:2262 Cell scraping, with EGD, II:1246 Cell therapy, II:686–688 Cell transplantation, for macular degeneration, III:2077 CellCept. See Mycopehnolate Cells Langerhans, IV:2471 neuroblast, IV:2340–2341 Cellular suspensions. See Cell therapy Cellulite, surgical removal of, III:2009–2011 Cellulitis, II:684–686 from acute lymphangitis, I:47 3690 from clenched fist injury, II:820 debridement for, II:1007 from dog bites, I:498 from hemophilus infections, III:1586 with lymphadenitis, III:2064 with manual lymph drainage, II:1136 from mucormycosis, III:2232 skin culture for, IV:3068 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3158 from TORCH tests, V:3339 Celontin. See Methsuccimide Center for Mind/Body Medicine, I:430 Center for Smell and Taste Disorders, IV:3100 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on AIDS, I:73–74, 77–78 on antihelminthic drugs, I:273 on atherosclerosis, I:397 on bacillary angiomatosis, I:434 on botulism, I:561 on chickenpox, II:750, 752 on childhood immunizations, II:761–762 on chronic fatigue syndrome, II:802 on cocaine use during pregnancy, II:832 on concussion, II:878 on coronary heart disease prevention, II:933 on detoxification therapy, II:1041 on encephalitis, II:1177 on erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 on exercise, III:1535 on food poisoning, II:1353 on gay and lesbian health, III:1416 on genital herpes, III:1440 on genital warts, I:172 on gonorrhea, III:1473 on halofantrine for malaria, III:2090 on infection control, III:1822 on influenza, III:1836 on ischemia prevention, III:1871 on lead poisoning, III:1739, 1965 on men’s health, III:2164–2165 on monkeypox, III:2212 on mumps, III:2255 on overhydration, IV:2448–2449 on patient isolation, III:1872 on progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 on rape, IV:2816–2817, 2818, 2819 on schistosomiasis, IV:2955 on STDs, IV:3020–3021 on tetanus vaccinations, V:3264, 3265 Travel’s Health Section, V:3465 on vaccination, V:3465 Central alveolar hypoventillation syndrome. See Sleep apnea Central auditory processing, I:415 Central core disease. See Nemaline myopathy Central foramen, II:836 Central Mississippi River Valley disease. See Histoplasmosis Central nervous system abnormalities of from anticancer agents, I:490 mental retardation from, III:2175 with antihistamines, I:278 bleeding into, III:1777 damage to from herpes simplex, V:3339 paralysis from, IV:2491 diseases (See Central nervous system diseases) in motion sickness, III:2218 in multiple sclerosis, III:2249–2250 neurologic examination for, IV:2350 in paresthesia, IV:2365 peripheral neuropathy and, II:1057, IV:2550 sudden infant death syndrome and, IV:3214 in TORCH syndrome, V:3338 tumors (See Central nervous system tumors) Central nervous system cancer AIDS-related lymphomas, I:78, 80, 81 brain (See Brain cancer) from chronic leukemia, III:1992 from lymphomas, III:2093 radiation therapy for, II:639 Central nervous system depressants, II:688–689 with anticonvulsants, I:253, 256 baclofen as, III:2259 with barbiturates, I:445, 447 benzodiazepines and, I:467, 469 for insomnia, I:282, 283, 284 with interferons, III:1793 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 with methadone, III:2181 for motion sickness, III:2219 with opioid analgesics, I:178 overdose, II:1104–1105 sleep disorders from, IV:3089–3089 with SSRIs, IV:2991, 2992 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 withdrawal from, V:3573 Central nervous system diseases from adenoviruses, I:57 from AIDS, I:78, 80, 81 Behcet’s syndrome as, I:459 delirium with, II:1022 hiccups from, III:1631 learning disorders from, III:1969 from leptospirosis, III:1981 from listeriosis, III:2013 with lung transplantation, III:2054 precocious puberty from, IV:2691 with pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for neonatal meningitis, II:1237 for otitis media, IV:2435 with penicillins, IV:2528 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 serum sickness from, IV:3008 for sinusitis, IV:3058 for strep throat, IV:3179 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3300 toxic epidermal necrolysis from, V:3345 Cephamycin, I:241 Ceptaz. See Ceftazidime Ceralyte. See Oral rehydration solutions Cercariae, in schistosomiasis, IV:2953 Cerea flexibilitas, with catatonic stupor, II:676 Cereals, tapeworms in, V:3240 Cerebellar ataxia, from Hartnup disease, III:1511 Cerebellar degeneration, from alcoholism, I:91, 92, 94 Cerebellum brain tumors in, I:570 in movement disorders, III:2221 in PSP, IV:2721 Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:694–697 Cerebral aneurysm, II:697–700 Cerebral angiography, I:198 for arteriovenous malformations, I:358 vs. CAT scan, II:875 for cerebral aneurysm, II:699 for craniotomy, II:946 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 Cerebral arteries, ischemia in, III:1869 Cerebral beriberi. See Korsakoff’s syndrome Cerebral blood flow, in head injuries, III:1520 Cerebral cortex Alzheimer’s disease and, I:135 degeneration of, II:1024 in delusions, II:1023 LSD and, III:2073 Cerebral edema from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:697 from complement deficiencies, II:874 from concussion, II:879 from craniotomy, II:948 from diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1055 from electric brain stimulation, II:1146 in hives, III:1642 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 Cerebral electrical stimulation, IV:3003 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Cerebral embolism, II:1169, IV:3194–3195 Cerebral hemispheres, I:333 Cerebral hemorrhage brain hemorrhage, IV:3129 Flemish hereditary, II:696 Cerebral palsy, II:701–706 chest physical therapy for, II:745 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 movement disorders from, III:2221 muscle spasms and cramps of, III:2260 from neonatal jaundice, IV:2330 paralysis from, IV:2491 scoliosis from, IV:2971 Cerebral stenosis, V:3372 Cerebral toxoplasmosis. See Toxoplasmosis Cerebral vascular accidents. See Stroke Cerebral vasculitis, II:695, 697 Cerebral vasospasm. See Transient ischemic attack Cerebral ventricles CAT scan of, II:875, 877 in congenital brain defects, II:890 hemorrhage, IV:2865 in intracranial hypertension, I:444 shunts for, V:3502–3503 Cerebritis, II:1177 Cerebrospinal fluid brain tumors and, I:570 hydrocephalus and, III:1687 with meningitis, III:2153, 2155–2156 in myelography, III:2284 with papilledema, IV:2488 in Refsum disease, III:2004 shunts for, V:3502 in spinal anesthesia, I:190 Cerebrospinal fluid analysis, II:706–711, 707f for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for autoimmune diseases, I:424 for cerebral aneurysm, II:699 with neurologic examination, IV:2352 for subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3200 See also Lumbar puncture Cerebrospinal fluid drainage for congenital brain defects, II:891 from nasal trauma, IV:2318 Cerebrovascular accident. See Stroke Cerebrovascular amyloidosis. See Cerebral amyloid angiopathy Cerebrovascular disorders catatonia from, II:676 from electrolyte disorders, II:1156 endarterectomy for, II:1180 in women, V:3576, 3577 See also Stroke Ceredase. See Alglucerase 3691 Ceredase from schistosomiasis, IV:2954 from tapeworm infections, V:3238, 3241 Central nervous system infections, II:689–691 antidiuretic hormone test for, I:266 polio as, IV:2648 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 Central nervous system stimulants, II:691–691 with caffeine, II:626 cocaine as, II:831 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 sleep disorders from, IV:3089 withdrawal from, V:3572, 3573–3574 Central nervous system tests, I:495 Central nervous system tumors antidiuretic hormone test and, I:267 from small cell lung cancer, III:2048 Central pontine myelinolysis, I:92 Central retinal artery occlusion. See Retinal artery occlusion Central retinal vein occlusion. See Retinal vein occlusion Central sleep apnea, IV:3084 Central sleep apnea syndrome. See Central sleep apnea Centre for Reading Research, II:1115 Centrifugation in lymphocyte tests, III:2068 in plasmapheresis, IV:2619 Centronuclear myopathy. See Myotubular myopathy CEP. See Congenital erythropoietic porphyria Cephalexin antibiotic-associated colitis from, I:238 for bacterial infections, II:693 for carbuncle, I:537 for cellulitis, II:685 for furunculosis, I:537 serum sickness from, IV:3008 Cephalopelvic disproportion, II:725 Cephaloridine, kidney damage from, IV:2337 Cephalosporins, I:240, 241–242, II:692–695 anaphylaxis from, I:179 for anthrax, I:225 antibiotic-associated colitis from, I:238 with creatinine test, II:949 for cross infection, III:1675 for cystitis, II:993 for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for lymphadenitis, III:2065 for meningitis, III:2156 Cerezyme Cerezyme. See Imiglucerase Cerivastatin, for high cholesterol, II:789 Certification and licensing in reflexology, IV:2845 for therapeutic touch, V:3283 Cerumen, II:709–711 from hearing aids, III:1527 hearing loss from, III:1528 otoscopy for, I:415, II:1121 Cerumen impaction, II:709–711, 710f Cerumenex, for cerumen impaction, II:710 Cervastatin, for high cholesterol, II:787 Cervical biopsy with cervicitis, II:723 colposcopy for, II:864, IV:2519 after pap smear, IV:2487 for postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2680 Cervical cancer, II:711–717 with AIDS, I:78 antenatal tests for, I:219 with breastfeeding, III:1943 cervical conization for, II:717 colposcopy for, II:864 from DES, II:1039 ethnic differences in, III:2199 genital warts and, III:1445 hysterectomy for, III:1760, 1761 lesbian health and, III:1415 pap smear for, IV:2484–2487, 2517 from papillomavirus, IV:3020 pelvic examination for, II:634 radiation therapy for, II:639 Cervical caps, II:911 cervicitis from, II:723 with vulvovaginitis, V:3542 Cervical cerclage for incompetent cervix, III:1812 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 Cervical collar for cervical disk disease, II:718 for cervical spondylosis, II:721 immobilization and, III:1781 for whiplash, V:3555–3556 See also Orthopedic braces Cervical conization, II:717–718 Cervical disk disease, II:718–719 Cervical disks, aging of, II:718–719 Cervical dysplasia colposcopy for, II:864 folic acid for, II:1347 naturopathy for, IV:2323 pap smear for, IV:2486–2487 Cervical dystonia. See Torticollis Cervical hood, from DES exposure, II:1040 Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, IV:2486–2487 Cervical osteoarthritis, II:720 3692 Cervical pregnancy. See Ectopic pregnancy Cervical radiculopathy, II:720 Cervical smear. See Pap smear Cervical spondylitic myelopathy, II:720 Cervical spondylosis, II:719–722 Cervical traction, V:3357 Cervical ventricle stenosis, IV:3136 Cervical vertebrae aging of, II:720 with cervical disk disease, II:718 with herniated disk, II:739, III:1628 in osteoarthritis, IV:2412 rehabilitation for, IV:2846 in whiplash, V:3555 Cervicitis, II:722–723 Cervicofacial actinomycosis. See Actinomycosis Cervicofacial rhytidectomy. See Face lift Cervistatin, for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 Cervix abnormalities of from DES exposure, II:1039–1040 incompetent cervix, III:1811–1812 infertility from, III:1828–1829 in cervical conization, II:717 colposcopy of, II:864–866 in contraception, II:911 dilation of in childbirth, II:757 miscarriage and, III:2204–2205 in dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 in endometrial biopsy, II:1186 with genital herpes, III:1441, 1443 in gonorrhea, III:1471 in hermaphroditism, III:1847 incompetent (See Incompetent cervix) in induced labor, III:1816–1817 inflammation of (See Cervicitis) mucus in, with hormone contraceptives, II:1031 obstruction of, II:717–718 in placenta previa, IV:2610 in premature membrane rupture, IV:2703 tear of, from endometrial biopsy, II:1187 Cervix dysplasia. See Cervical dysplasia Cesarean section, II:723–727 antepartum testing and, I:223 for breech birth, I:595 with coccyx injuries, II:837 with congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 electronic fetal monitoring and, II:1162 vs. forceps delivery, II:759 with genital herpes, III:1440 with gestational diabetes, III:1447 vs. induced labor, II:1108 with multiple pregnancy, III:2249 after myomectomy, III:2293 perinatal infection and, IV:2542 placenta previa from, IV:2610 for placental abruption, IV:2613 after regional anesthesia, I:191 with tubal ligation, V:3397 Cestodiasis. See Tapeworm infections Cetirizine, for allergies, I:277, 278 CF. See Cystic fibrosis CFI. See Clenched fist injury CFIDS. See Chronic fatigue syndrome CFIDS Foundation, II:802 CFS. See Cerebrospinal fluid; Chronic fatigue syndrome CFS analysis. See Cerebrospinal fluid analysis CFTR gene, II:984–986, 987–988 CGG sequence, II:1366–1367, 1368 Chagas, Carlos, II:727 Chagas disease, II:727–728 from blood transfusion, I:526 myocarditis from, III:2289 sick sinus syndrome from, IV:3040 Chai hu. See Chinese thoroughwax Chakra balancing, IV:2849 Chalazion, II:1271, IV:2917 Chalk bones. See Osteopetrosis Challenge test for occupational asthma, IV:2387 for periodic paralysis, IV:2544 Chamaelirium luteum. See False unicorn root Chamaemelum nobilis. See Roman chamomile Chamomile, I:365–367, 366 for ADHD, I:413 for alcoholism, I:98 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for cluster headache, II:825 for colic, II:848 for conjunctivitis, II:904 for constipation, II:907 for corns and calluses, II:924 for dermatitis, II:1038 for drug addictions, II:833 for furunculosis, I:537 for heartburn, III:1555 for IBS, III:1867 for insomnia, III:1845 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for nausea, IV:2326 for otitis media, IV:2435 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 Chamomilla recutita. See Chamomile CHAMPS study, III:2252 Chancre, IV:3227 Chancroid, II:729–730 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 exposure to (See Chemical exposure) eye injuries from, III:2137 household, poisoning from, IV:2643, 2644 industrial (See Industrial chemicals) jaundice from, III:1882 lung diseases from, III:2050 mineral toxicity from, III:2194 miscarriage from, III:2204 myopathies from, III:2294 pancreatic cancer from, IV:2474 pulmonary fibrosis from, IV:2782 Chemoembolization, for liver cancer, III:2021 Chemonucleolysis, II:738–739 for herniated disk, III:1630 for sciatica, IV:2964 Chemosis, from orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2407 Chemotherapy, II:740–743 acupuncture with, I:40 for acute leukemia, III:1988 for adenocarcinoma, II:1040 adjuvant (See Adjuvant chemotherapy) for adrenal gland cancer, I:60, 62 for AIDS-related cancer, I:80 alopecia from, I:125, II:640 for amyloidosis, I:162 for anal cancer, I:171 with animal bite infections, I:207 antibiotic prophylaxis for, IV:2726 anticancer drugs for, I:246–249 birth defects from, I:490 for bladder cancer, I:508 bone marrow aspiration and, I:547 for brain tumors, I:572–573, 574 for breast cancer, I:581, 583, 584 with breastfeeding, III:1943 for cancer, II:635, 636, 637 with candidiasis, II:646 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2344 for cervical cancer, II:714, IV:2487 cholestasis from, II:783 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for colon cancer, II:853 with creatinine test, II:949 curative, II:639, 640 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976 with cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 edema from, II:1135 for endometrial cancer, II:1190, 1191 enteral nutrition and, V:3400 for esophageal cancer, II:1241 for eye cancer, II:1261 for gallbladder cancer, III:1380 gallium scan after, III:1383, 1384 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for head and neck cancer, III:1516 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646–1647 for hydatidiform mole, III:1685 for hyperthyroidism, IV:2807–2808 hypogonadism from, III:1738 ileus from, III:1779 immunotherapy after, III:1791 intrathecal, for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898–1899 for kidney cancer, III:1910 kidney stones from, III:1917 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 lactose intolerance from, II:649 for laryngeal cancer, III:1953, IV:3124 for leukemia, III:1992 for liver cancer, III:2021 with lumpectomy, III:2036, 2037 for lung cancer, III:2045 for lymphomas, III:2093–2094 lymphopenia from, III:2068 malnutrition from, III:2104 for MALT lymphomas, III:2108 for melanoma, III:2098 menorrhagia from, II:1112 MOPP/ABVC regimen, III:1646, 1647 with mucormycosis, III:2231 for multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2237 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 myelodysplastic syndrome and, III:2279, 2281 for myelofibrosis, III:2282 nausea from, IV:2325 neoadjuvant (See Neoadjuvant chemotherapy) for neuroblastoma, IV:2341–2342 with neutropenia, IV:2354 for non-small cell lung cancer, III:2045 for ovarian cancer, IV:2442 for Paget’s disease of the breast, III:2158 palliative, II:641 with pancreatectomy, IV:2469 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472, 2476 for penile cancer, IV:2530 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2579 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 premature menopause from, IV:2702 with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 psychosis from, IV:2766 radiation therapy and, IV:2810 for rectal cancer, IV:2831–2832 for retinoblastoma, IV:2886 3693 Chemotherapy condom use and, II:882 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 Character disorders. See Personality disorders Charcoal, activated. See Activated charcoal Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, II:732–736, II:734, IV:2365, 2549, 2552, 2554 Charcot’s joints, II:736–737 Charleston bending brace. See Orthopedic braces Chaste tree. See Chasteberry Chasteberry, I:369–371 for amenorrhea, III:2171–2172 for menopause, III:2162 for oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 for PMS, IV:2711 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 Cheeses, with antituberculosis drugs, I:310–311 Chelation therapy, II:737–738 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for berylliosis, I:472 for copper toxicity, III:2195 for coronary heart disease, II:931 for detoxification, II:1043 for heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 for iron toxicity, III:2195 for ischemia, III:1870 for lead poisoning, III:1967 for multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 for nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 Chelidonium majus. See Rock-poppy Cheloid scars. See Keloids Chemet. See Succimer Chemical antacids, I:218 Chemical burns, I:619 Chemical debridement. See Debridement Chemical dependency. See Addiction Chemical exposure allergic rhinitis from, I:112 aplastic anemia from, I:337 atopic dermatitis from, I:404 nasal trauma from, IV:2317, 2318 sore throat from, IV:3118 vesicles from, IV:3074 Chemical leukoderma, V:3527 Chemical peeling. See Skin resurfacing Chemical poisoning. See Poisoning, from chemicals Chemicals acute leukemia from, III:1987 asthma from, I:380 birth defects from, I:490 bronchiectasis from, I:596 corneal ulcers from, II:921 cyanosis from, II:980 Chemotherapy for salivary gland tumors, IV:2934 for sarcomas, IV:2944, 2945 shingles from, IV:3031 for small cell lung cancer, III:2049 for spinal cord tumors, IV:3133 sporotrichosis and, IV:3143 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3156 with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, IV:3160 for stomach cancer, IV:3165, 3167 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for testicular cancer, V:3258 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3298 for thymoma, V:3302–3303 for thyroid cancer, V:3307–3308 tumor removal with, V:3415 uric acid tests for, V:3442 with ventricular shunts, V:3502 for vulvar cancer, V:3537–3538 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3546 for warts, V:3549 WBC count and differential for, V:3556 for Wilm’s tumor, V:3565–3566 Chernobyl congenital amputation from radiation, II:887 radiation injuries from, IV:2808 Cherries for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 poisoning from, IV:2643 Cherry angiomas, I:494, 496 Cherry hemangiomas, I:494 Chest. See Thorax Chest compressions. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Chest drainage therapy, II:743–744 See also Thoracentesis Chest injuries. See Thoracic injuries Chest pain vs. achalasia, I:20 ambulatory electrocardiography for, III:1654 from aortic aneurysm, I:325 from aortic dissection, I:327 from asbestosis, I:370 atherectomy and, I:391, 393 from atherosclerosis, I:394 with beta blockers, I:474 from blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 from Chagas’ disease, II:728 from cocaine, II:832 coronary artery bypass grafting for, II:925 from coronary heart disease, II:929 from costochondritis, II:940 from decongestants, II:1012 3694 from diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1070 drugs for, I:229–231 echocardiography for, II:1129 EGD for, II:1246 electrophysiologic tests for, II:1163 from epoetin, II:645 esophageal test for, II:1242 with exercise, II:1249 from heart failure, III:1538 vs. heartburn, III:1554 with hemoptysis, III:1589 from MAO inhibitors, III:2215 from mitral valve prolapse, III:2207 myoglobin test for, III:2291 nausea with, IV:2324 from nitrofurantoin, V:3449 from ondansetron, II:644 with palpitations, IV:2465 from pleurisy, IV:2631 from pneumothorax, IV:2641 technetium heart scan for, V:3246 Valsalva maneuver for, V:3471 Chest percussion, for emphysema, II:1174 Chest physical therapy, II:745–747 Chest surgery. See Thoracic surgery Chest tubes in chest drainage therapy, II:743, 744 for lung surgery, III:2053–2054 for lung transplantation, III:2055 Chest x-ray, II:747–749 for ABPA, I:108 for aneurysmectomy, I:193 for aortic dissection, I:327 for aortic valve insufficiency, I:328 for aortic valve stenosis, I:330 for aspergillosis, I:376 for asthma, I:381 for atelectasis, I:390 for atrial septal defects, I:409 for berylliosis, I:472 for black lung disease, I:506 for bladder cancer, I:508 for blastomycosis, I:513 for brain abscess, I:567 for breast cancer, I:580 for bronchiectasis, I:597 for bronchitis, I:599 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 for chest drainage therapy, II:743–744 with chest physical therapy, II:747 for CO poisoning, II:652 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for colon cancer, II:851 for congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 for cor pulmonale, II:917 for cough, II:942 for cross infection, III:1675 for cryptococcosis, II:965 with defibrillation, II:1016 dyspnea from, IV:3036 for emphysema, II:810, 1173 for extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1717 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for heart failure, III:1538 for heart murmurs, III:1541 for heart surgery, III:1544 for heart transplantation, III:1545, 1547 for heart valve replacement, III:1551 for hemoptysis, III:1589 for histoplamsosis, III:1640 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1644, 1645 for hypertension, III:1722 for hypothermia, III:1754 for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, III:1803 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 for kidney cancer, III:1910 for laryngeal cancer, III:1951 for liver cancer, III:2020 for lung abscess, III:2039, 2040 with lung biopsy, III:2040, 2041 for lung cancer, III:2044, 2048 for lung diseases, III:2051 for melanoma, III:2097 for melioidosis, III:2151 for mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 for mucormycosis, III:2232 for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 for mycobacterial infections, III:2277 for nasal trauma, IV:2318 for osteoporosis, IV:2426 after pacemaker implantation, IV:2453 for pancreatitis, IV:2479 for PAP, IV:2776 for parrot fever, IV:2506 for plague, IV:2615 for pleural effusion, IV:2629 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for pneumonia, IV:2640 for pneumothorax, IV:2642 for prostate cancer, IV:2731 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for pulmonary edema, IV:2778 for pulmonary embolism, II:1170, IV:2780 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 for pulmonary valve insufficiency, IV:2787 for pulmonary valve stenosis, IV:2788 for respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Chiclero ulcer. See Cutaneous leishmaniasis Chi’h Kung. See Qigong Child abuse, I:16, 17, 18, II:753–756, 755t battered child syndrome from, I:452–453 biting with, I:498, 500 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 concussion from, II:879 conduct disorder from, II:883 dissociative disorders from, II:1085, 1086, 1087–1088 dissociative identity disorder from, III:2244–2245 factitious disorders from, II:1277 mental retardation from, III:2174 in Munchausen syndrome, III:2257 paraphilias from, IV:3018 personality disorders from, IV:2565 shaken baby syndrome from, IV:3023 Child Behavior Checklist, I:412, II:883 Child custody, III:2122 Child day care centers hepatitis A from, III:1596 infection control for, III:1822 Child Depression Inventory, II:1034 Child development, II:762–764, 765 anxiety and, I:318–319 child abuse and, II:754–755 Child neglect. See Child abuse Child Protective Services, II:755 Childbirth, II:756–761, 757–759f Alexander technique and, I:104 arteriovenous malformation hemorrhage from, I:357 breech presentation, I:594–596 chlamydial pneumonia from, II:771 coccyx injuries from, II:836 cytomegalovirus infections from, II:1000 D & C after, II:1075 drugs for, II:1108–1109 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 embolism from, II:1169 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 after female genital mutilation, II:1307 genital herpes from, III:1440 gonorrhea and, III:1472 with hepatitis B, III:1600 hydatidiform mole from, III:1684 with listeriosis, III:1782, 2012 local anesthesia and, I:190 with multiple pregnancy, III:2247 natural, II:761 opioid analgesics for, I:175 pelvic relaxation from, IV:2524 postpartum depression and, IV:2681 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 premature membrane rupture, IV:2703 puerperal infection and, IV:2773–2775 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 with spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 STDs and, IV:3020 stress urinary incontinence from, III:2123 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 See also Labor Childbirth education, II:761, IV:2698 Childhelp USA/IOF Foresters National Child Abuse Hotline, II:756 Childhood adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 Childhood diseases ataxia-telangiectasia as, I:387–389 blood transfusions for, V:3368 leading causes, II:765t mental retardation from, III:2174 polyglandular deficiency syndromes as, IV:2663 rash from, IV:2820 See also specific childhood diseases Childhood disintegrative disorder, I:419, IV:2568–2569 Childproofing. See Children’s safety Children ability tests for, IV:2763, 2764 achievement tests for, IV:2763, 2764 adenoviruses in, I:56–57, 58 AIDS in, I:74, 75, 80, 86 anticonvulsants and, I:253, 254 anxiety disorders in, I:323 (See also Separation anxiety disorder) bejel in, I:460 bites and stings in, I:206, 208, 497, 503 brain tumors in, I:569, 570, 573, 574 chickenpox in, II:749–751 congenital adrenal hyperplasia in, II:885 CPR for, II:662, 664, 765 decongestants in, II:1011 dehydration and, II:1017 depression in, II:1033 diabetic ketoacidosis in, II:1055 digital rectal examination of, IV:2833 drowning of, IV:2326–2328 drug overdose in, II:1104, 1106 dyslexia in, II:1114, 1116 Fanconi’s syndrome in, II:1290 fluoroquinolones and, II:1345 food poisoning in, II:1353–1356 foreign objects and, II:1358, 1360 fractures in, II:1363, 1364 gastroenteritis in, III:1408 with gender identity disorder, III:1417–1418 glomerulonephritis in, III:1461 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1565 lead poisoning in, III:1965–1967 music therapy for, III:2270 3695 Children for RSV, IV:2868 for sarcoidosis, IV:2940 for sarcomas, IV:2944 for secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 for silicosis, IV:3055 after snake bites, I:500 for splenic trauma, IV:3141 with sputum culture, IV:3148 for strongyloidiasis, V:3292 for thymoma, V:3302 after tracheotomy, V:3354 for tricuspid valve insufficiency, V:3389 for tricuspid valve stenosis, V:3390 for tuberculosis, V:3403, 3407 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 Chewing tobacco, IV:3104 Chi acupressure and, I:37–38, 39 acupuncture and, I:42, 43 qigong and, IV:2798–2799 Chi kung. See Qigong Chiari-Arnold syndrome. See ArnoldChiari deformity Chiari II anomaly, IV:3126, 3127 Chiari II malformation. See ArnoldChiari deformity Chick wittles. See Chickweed Chicken pox. See Chickenpox Chickenpox, II:749–753 with anticancer agents, I:247 antiviral drugs for, I:315 with bismuth subsalicylate, I:265 with cellulitis, II:684 encephalitis from, II:1177 gammaglobulins from, III:1391 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1794 itching from, III:1874 after kidney transplantation, III:1922 meningitis from, III:2154 mental retardation from, III:2175 vs. monkeypox, III:2212 vs. mumps, III:2255 myocarditis from, III:2290 rash from, IV:2820 Reye’s syndrome after, IV:2895 shingles and, IV:3031 skin lesions from, IV:3076 toxic shock syndrome from, V:3347 transverse myelitis from, V:3375 Tzanck preparation for, V:3424 vaccination for, V:3465 Chickweed for contact dermatitis, I:121 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 Children night terrors in, IV:2355–2356 otitis media in, IV:2433 pica in, IV:2595, 2596 poisoning and, IV:2643 rectal polyps in, IV:2834 retinoblastoma in, II:1260–1261 with Reye’s syndrome, IV:2895–2896 rheumatoid arthritis in (See Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis) sarcomas in, IV:2942, 2945 speech disorders in, IV:3122, 3123, 3199–3200 splenic trauma in, IV:3141, 3142 sports injuries in, IV:3144, 3146–3147 starvation in, IV:3161, 3162 subacute sclerosing panencephalitis in, IV:3200–3201 substance abuse and, IV:3206, 3208, 3211 Sydenham’s chorea in, IV:3223–3224 with syphilis, IV:3228 tracheotomy and, V:3355 Children’s aspirin. See Aspirin Children’s health, II:761–766 diagnosis of, II:763 emotional and social, II:763 mental, II:762 prevention and, II:765–766 treatment of, II:763–764 Children’s safety, II:765–766 See also Car Seat Safety Chilean clover. See Alfalfa Chili peppers. See Cayenne Chimaphilia umbellata. See Pipsissewa Chimney-sweeps. See Plantain Chinaberry tree poisoning, IV:2644 Chinese angelica. See Dong quai Chinese ephedra. See Ephedra Chinese foxglove, for anemia, I:184 See also Foxglove Chinese herbal drugs for acne, I:26 for cystitis, II:994 for dysmenorrhea, II:1118 for gallstones, III:1390 for high cholesteol, II:788 for indigestion, III:1814 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for palpitations, IV:2466 for polymyositis, IV:2667–2668 for prostate cancer, IV:2734 for prostatitis, IV:2741 for psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 See also specific drugs Chinese liver fluke. See Clonorchis sinensis Chinese philosophy, IV:2798, V:3359–3360 Chinese shadow boxing. See Tai chi Chinese thoroughwax 3696 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for rubella, IV:2927 Chinese traditional medicine, V:3359–3361, 3359 aging and, I:71 for anxiety, I:321 for anxiety disorders, I:324 ayurvedic medicine and, I:429 for brain tumors, I:573 for bronchitis, I:600 for cancer, II:636–637 Chi and, I:37–38 for cluster headache, II:825 for common cold, II:872 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for fatigue, II:1297 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for fractures, II:1365 for frostbite, II:1372 healing imagery in, III:1491 herbal (See Chinese herbal drugs) for liver cirrhosis, II:817 for low back pain, III:2033 for orchitis, IV:2408 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for sleep disorders, IV:3092 for substance abuse, IV:3211 See also Acupuncture; Qigong Chiropractic, II:767–770, 768 for AIDS, I:81 for bursitis, I:621 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for contractures, II:914 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for dizziness, II:1096 for endometriosis, II:1194 for facial paralysis, I:463 for hammertoe, III:1506 for headache, III:1524 for low back pain, III:2033 vs. osteopathy, IV:2422 for pain, IV:2422, 2460 for scoliosis, IV:2972, 2973 spurious polycythemia from, IV:2964 for whiplash, V:3555 Chlamydia, IV:3020, 3022 antenatal tests for, I:219 cervicitis with, II:723 condom use and, II:881, 882, IV:3023 conjunctivitis from, II:903 corneal ulcers from, II:922 coronary heart disease from, II:929 ectopic pregnancy and, II:1131 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 with gonorrhea, III:1473 in men, III:2167 pelvic exam for, IV:2517, 2519 proctitis from, I:210, IV:2719 from rape and sexual assault, IV:2817, 2818, 2819 Chlamydia pneumoniae, II:770–772 perinatal infection from, IV:2540 sputum culture for, IV:3149 Chlamydia psittaci parrot fever from, IV:2506 pneumonia from, II:771 sputum culture for, IV:3149, 3150 Chlamydia trachomatis chlamydia from, IV:2817, 2819, 3020 inclusion conjunctivitis from, III:1810 lymphogranuloma venereum from, III:2071 nongonococcal urethritis from, IV:2360 perinatal infection from, IV:2540–2543 pneumonia from, II:771 STDs from, IV:2522 trachoma from, V:3355 visual impairment from, V:3510 Chlamydial conjunctivitis. See Inclusion conjunctivitis Chlamydiosis. See Parrot fever Chloasma. See Melasma Chlolestyramine, with tetracyclines, V:3268 Chlor-Trimeton. See Chlorpheniramine Chloral hydrate, for central nervous system depression, II:689 Chlorambucil for Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1799 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3546 Chloramphenicol acute leukemia from, III:1987 for anaerobic infections, I:168 for anthrax, I:225 for bartonellosis, I:452 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for melioidosis, III:2151 neutropenia from, IV:2353 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for plague, IV:2616 for RMSF, IV:2911 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for scrub typhus, IV:2977 for typhus, V:3423 Chloraseptic. See Dental anesthetics Chlordiazepoxide for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for alcohol withdrawal, V:3573 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Chlorpromazine HCI, tardive dyskinesia from, V:3242 Chlorpropamide bilirubin levels from, III:2024 for diabetes mellitus, I:262, II:1049 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 Chlorpyrifos, III:1842 Chlorthalidone, for edema, II:1088 Chlorzoxazone, as muscle relaxant, III:2259 Chocolate, insomnia from, III:1845 Choking, II:772–773 with drug overdose, II:1106 from esophageal atresia, II:1238 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1564–1566 Cholangiocarcinoma, III:2017, 2019 Cholangiography for bile duct cancer, I:478 for cholestasis, II:785 for gallbladder cancer, III:1379 Cholangiomas. See Bile duct adenoma Cholangitis, II:773–777 bile duct cancer from, I:477 from echinococcosis, II:1128 from endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1199 from ERCP, II:1197 PTHC and, IV:2532 tube compression for, V:3399 Cholecystectomy, II:777–778 for cholecystitis, II:780 for gallstones, III:1389 laparoscopic (See Laparoscopic cholecystectomy) Cholecystitis, II:778–780, III:1388 cholecystectomy for, II:777–778 vs. gallbladder cancer, III:1379 from typhoid, V:3421 Cholecystography, for gallstones, III:1388 Choledochal cysts, I:477 Choledyl. See Oxtriphylline Cholelithiasis. See Gallstones Cholelithotomy, III:1386 Cholera, II:781–782 vs. enterobacterial infections, II:1205 gastroenteritis from, III:1408 Cholera vaccine, I:110, V:3465 Cholestasis, II:783–785 alkaline phosphatase and, I:106 cholangitis from, II:774 with cholesterol tests, II:794 from echinococcosis, II:1127–1128 ERCP for, II:1196–1197 from fluke infection, II:1343 with gallbladder cancer, III:1380 jaundice from, III:1883, IV:2330 liver function tests for, III:2027 nuclear medicine scan for, III:1381–1382 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from pancreatic cancer, IV:2474 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 PTHC for, IV:2532 stool fat test for, IV:3173–3174 transhepatic biliary catheterization for, V:3370 ultrasonography for, I:2 urinalysis for, V:3446 vitamin A deficiency from, V:3512 vitamin E deficiency from, V:3518 vitamin K deficiency from, V:3519 Cholesteatoma mastoidectomy for, III:2133 from middle ear ventilation, III:2305 surgery for, II:1124 Cholesterol in atherosclerosis, I:393, 397 buildup (See Plaque) with coronary heart disease, II:929–930 with diuretics, II:1089 drugs for, II:789–791 with embolism, I:355 gallstones from, III:1388 guided imagery for, III:1491 after heart valve replacement, III:1551 high (See High cholesterol) in hypercholesterolemia, III:1698–1699 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706, 1708 Korean ginseng for, III:1455, 1456 lipoproteins test for, III:2006–2007 restricted (See Low cholesterol diet) tests for, II:792–794 urinalysis for, V:3446 in Wolman disease, III:2005 Cholesterol polyps, III:1383 Cholesterol-reducing agents, II:789–791 for atherosclerosis, I:396 with digitalis, II:1074 with diuretics, II:1090 for dizziness, II:1095 thyroid hormones and, V:3314 Cholesterol test, II:792–794, III:2006–2008 Cholesterolosis, III:1388 Cholestin, II:788 Cholestipol, for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 Cholestyramine with acetaminophen, I:19 for diarrhea, II:1067 with digitalis, II:1074 with diuretics, II:1090 for high cholesterol, II:789, 790 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 for IBS, III:1867 thyroid function tests and, V:3309 thyroid hormones and, V:3314 3697 Cholestyramine for anxiety, I:320, 466 for central nervous system depression, II:689 with cisapride, I:273 in HRT, III:1669 Chlorella pyrenoidosa, for cancer, II:1191 Chlorhexidine, as antiseptic, I:307, 308 Chloride deficiency of, III:2190–2192 in diabetes insipidus, II:1046 in electrolyte disorders, II:1153, 1155, 1156 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 kidney function tests for, III:1913 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 in metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 supplements of, III:2196 toxicity, III:2194 Chlorine dermatitis from, II:1037 for giardia, III:1450 Chloromycetin. See Chloramphenicol; Chlorpromazine Chloroquine for amebiasis, I:145 children and, I:287 for malaria, I:286, III:2090 mental health and, I:286 retinopathy and, IV:2889 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 Chlorotetracyclines, kidney damage from, IV:2337 Chlorothiazide for edema, II:1088 for heart attacks, III:1534 Chlorphenesin, as muscle relaxant, III:2259 Chlorpheniramine for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:118, 277, 278 Chlorpromazine for bipolar disorder, I:488 cholestasis from, II:784 delirium from, II:1021 for delusions, II:1023 for dementia, II:1026 with estrogens, III:1670 for hallucinations, III:1504 for hiccups, III:1632 with myasthenia gravis, III:2275 neutropenia from, IV:2355 for paranoia, IV:2493 with partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507 with protein electrophoresis, IV:2747 for psychoses, IV:2766 for psychosis, I:300 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:261 with zolpidem, I:284 Cholestyramine with triglycerides tests, V:3394 Cholestyramine resin, I:239 Choline salicylate, vs. aspirin, I:378 Cholinergic agents, II:794–795 with cystometry, II:995 with electromyography, II:1255 gastric acid determination and, III:1400 overdose, II:1104 Cholinergic antagonists antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 for asthma, I:120, 383 for COPD, II:811 with cystometry, II:995 delirium from, II:1021 with electromyography, II:1255 gastric acid determination and, III:1400 heartburn from, III:1553 for hyperhidrosis, III:1704 with hypotonic duodenography, III:1759 with lipase test, III:2002 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 overdose, II:1104 for Parkinson disease, I:296, IV:2502 for PSP, IV:2722 for spasms, I:308 with sphincter electromyography, II:1255 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Cholinergics. See Cholinergic agents Cholinesterase inhibitors, for Alzheimer’s disease, IV:3000 Chomosome analysis. See DNA analysis; Genetic testing Chondrodystrophy. See Achondroplasia Chondroitin, for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 Chondromalacia patellae, II:795–796, III:1928 Chondrosarcomas, IV:2942 Chopra, Deepak, I:429, 430 Chordomas, IV:2942 Chorea, III:2222 Choriocarcinoma, II:796–798 beta human chorionic gonadotropin in, IV:3213 chemotherapy for, II:639 from hydatidiform mole, III:1685 testicular, V:3256 Chorion frondosum, II:799 Chorionic gonadotropin, III:2248 Chorionic villi sampling, II:798–801, 799f for adrenoleukodystrophy, I:67 for albinism, I:90 vs. amniocentesis, I:154–155 for birth defects, I:492 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 for cri du chat syndrome, II:956 3698 for Down syndrome, II:1100 for Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 for lipidoses, III:2006 for Niemann-Pick disease, III:2005 for peroxisomal disorders, IV:2562 for pregnancy, IV:2697 preparation and risk in, III:1437–1438 for sickle cell disease, IV:3046 for Tay-Sachs disease, III:2005 with ultrasonography, IV:2525 See also Amniocentesis Chorioretinitis, in uveitis, V:3460 Choroid, cancer of. See Intraocular melanoma Choroidal hemorrhage, II:672 Choroidectomy, for eye cancer, II:1261 Choroiditis, in uveitis, V:3460 Chotzen’s syndrome. See SaethreChotzen syndrome Choudury, Bikram, III:1514 Christmas disease, II:826, 827, 828, 829 Chromaffin cells, II:677, IV:2577 Chromaffin tumors. See Pheochromocytoma Chromium for coronary heart disease, II:932 in fecal blood, II:1303 for glaucoma, III:1461 for hypoglycemia, III:1736 lung diseases from, III:2050 in nutrition, III:2196 physical allergy from, IV:2592 poisoning, III:1560–1561 Chromium picolinate for acne, I:26 with Atkins diet, I:402 Chromosome 1, II:1115 Chromosome 2 cystinuria from, II:990 in dyslexia, II:1115 Chromosome 6, II:1115 Chromosome 7, II:891 Chromosome 9 congenital brain defects from, II:891 in Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 Chromosome 11, III:1577 Chromosome 13, II:891 Chromosome 15, II:1115 Chromosome 16, III:1577 Chromosome 18 congenital brain defects from, II:891 in Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 Chromosome 19, I:135 Chromosome 21 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 in cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 in Down syndrome, II:1098, 1099 mental retardation from, III:2174 Chromosome 22, II:1071 Chromosome abnormalities cerebral amyloid angiopathy as, II:695 DiGeorge’s syndrome from, II:1071 in Down syndrome, II:1098 dyslexia from, II:1115 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 gynecomastia from, III:1497 in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 hermaphroditism from, III:1847 miscarriage from, III:2204 multiple endocrine neoplasia as, III:2236 polydactyly and syndactyly as, IV:2661 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 prenatal testing for, II:798–801 See also specific diseases Chromosome analysis bone marrow for, III:1438 in cancer, III:1437 with CVS, II:799 for Down syndrome, II:1099 in gene therapy, III:1419, 1420 in genetic testing, III:1432–1435 for hypogonadism, III:1738 in pre/postnatal testing, III:1432, 1435 Chromosomes, I:135, II:891, 990, 1071, 1115, III:1577 congenital brain defects from, II:891 in Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 in Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 in muscular dystrophy, III:2263 testing (See Chromosome analysis) See also Chromosome 22 Chronic anxiety. See Generalized anxiety disorder Chronic chemical poisoning. See Poisoning Chronic cold agglutinin disease, II:843 Chronic cystic mastitis. See Fibrocystic condition of the breast Chronic depression. See Dysthymic disorder Chronic disease in high risk pregnancy, III:1632, 1633 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2389 Chronic dyspnea, IV:3037 Chronic fatigue syndrome, II:801–804, II:1295 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 with Epstein-Barr virus test, II:1224 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 vs. Lyme disease, III:2059 Chronic glomerulonephritis, III:1461 Chronic granulomatous disease, II:805–806 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Chronic pain, IV:2459–2461 Alexander technique for, I:103, 105 analgesics for, I:174 Aston-patterning for, I:386 back (See Low back pain) biofeedback for, I:482 from breast reconstruction, I:590 cognitive therapy for, II:840 from congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 electric brain stimulation for, II:1145–1146 family therapy for, IV:3117 heat treatment for, III:1558 from herniated disk, III:1627 as malingering, III:2100 management of, IV:2462–2463 manipulation for, IV:2422 from sciatica, IV:2964 from spinal stenosis, IV:3136, 3137 tricyclic antidepressants for, I:258 Chronic pancreatitis. See Pancreatitis Chronic persistent hepatitis. See Hepatitis C Chronic renal failure. See Chronic kidney failure Chronic sensorimotor paralysis, IV:2551 Chronic wasting disease. See Spongiform encephalopathy Chronulac. See Lactulose CHRPE. See Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium Chrysanthemum parthenium. See Feverfew Chuchupate. See Osha Chvostek’s sign, II:1155 Chylomicrons in cholesterol tests, II:792 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1707 in hypolipoproteinemia, III:1741 lipoproteins test for, III:2007 Chylothorax from mediastinoscopy, III:2145 with pleural effusion, IV:2628 Chylous ascites. See Ascites Chymopapain, II:738–739 for chemonucleolysis, II:738–739 for herniated disk, III:1630 Chymotrypsin for autoimmune diseases, I:424 in celiac disease, IV:3173 Cibalith-S. See Lithium Cicada for measles, III:2140 for rubella, IV:2927 Ciclopirox, for fungal infections, I:270 Ciclosporin. See Cyclosporine Cidofovir for monkeypox, III:2212 for viral infections, I:315, 316, 318 Cigar smoking. See Smoking GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Cigarette smoking. See Smoking Ciguatera, from fish poisoning, II:1334 Ciguatoxin, in fish, II:1334 Cilia in bronchiectasis, I:596 function of, III:2043 in lung cancer, III:2046 smoking and, II:809 Ciliary muscles cancer of (See Intraocular melanoma) in presbyopia, IV:2713 Cimetidine with alprazolam, I:232 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antirheumatic drugs, I:307 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 with caffeine, II:626 cholestasis from, II:784 with cisapride, I:273 with creatinine test, II:949 with cyclosporine, III:1799 delirium from, II:1021 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 erection disorders with, IV:3051 for fish poisoning, II:1335 gastric acid determination and, III:1400 gynecomastia from, III:1497 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for hiatal hernias, III:1624 as migraine trigger, III:2188 parathyroid hormone test and, IV:2495 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for stomach ulcers, I:308 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:258, 261 Cimicifuga racemosa. See Black cohosh CIN. See Cervical dysplasia Cingulotomy, bilateral, IV:2770 Cinnabar, for nightmares, IV:3092 Cinnamon for athlete’s foot, I:399 with sunscreens, IV:3221 Cinobac. See Cinoxacin Cinoxacin fluoroquinolones and, II:1346 nalidixic acid and, V:3448 Cipro. See Ciprofloxacin Ciprofloxacin for anthrax, I:225 for antibiotic prophylaxis, IV:2726 for bacterial infections, II:1344, 1346 for campylobacteriosis, II:631 for chancroid, II:730 drug interactions with, II:1102 for food poisoning, II:1355–1356 3699 Ciprofloxacin Chronic indigestion. See Indigestion Chronic inflammatory demyelination polyradiculoneuropathy, IV:2491–2492, 2620 Chronic insomnia, III:1843 Chronic interstitial fibrosis, I:57 Chronic kidney failure, II:806–809 after acute kidney failure, I:46 from diabetes mellitus, II:1052 dialysis for, II:1058–1059 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 kidney transplantation for, III:1919–1921 from nephritis, IV:2334 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337, 2338 parathyroid hormone test for, IV:2494 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2743 from renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 from renal artery stenosis, IV:2856, 2857 troponins test for, V:3396 Chronic leukemia, III:1990–1993 See also Chronic lymphocytic leukemia Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, I:102–103, III:1990–1993 Chronic myeloid leukemia, III:1990–1993 Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, III:2279 Chronic nutritional disorder. See Celiac disease Chronic obstructive lung disease, II:809–812, 810f II:1172, 1174–1175 2,3-DPG test for, V:3420 with asthma, I:383 from black lung disease, I:506 carcinoembryonic antigen levels in, II:654 chest physical therapy for, II:745 chronic bronchitis, I:598, 600 cor pulmonale from, II:916–917 dyspnea from, IV:3036, 3037 with hemophilus infections, III:1587 inhalation therapies for, III:1837, 1838, 1841 lung transplantation for, III:2054 with opioid analgesics, I:177 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2744 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2865 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 surgery for, III:2053 in women, V:3576 See also Bronchitis Chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases. See Chronic obstructive lung disease Ciprofloxacin for gonorrhea, III:1473 for meningococcemia prevention, III:2158 nalidixic acid and, V:3448 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 for pyelonephritis, IV:2790 for travelers diarrhea, V:3380 Circadian rhythms. See Biological rhythms Circlage, for recurrent miscarriage, IV:2837 Circulation. See Blood circulation Circulatory diseases. See Cardiovascular diseases Circulatory system. See Cardiovascular system Circuma longa. See Turmeric Circumcision, II:812–814, 814f III:2168 for balanitis, I:440 for chancroid, II:730 cystitis and, II:992 female (See Female genital mutilation) for penile cancer, IV:2530 Cirrhosis. See Liver cirrhosis Cis-platinum. See Cisplatin Cisapride for gastroesophageal reflux, I:272 for heartburn, I:272, III:1555 for ileus, III:1780 for indigestion, III:1814 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 Cisplatin for anal cancer, I:171 kidney damage from, IV:2337 for laryngeal cancer, III:1953 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 for melanoma, III:2099 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 for small cell lung cancer, III:2049 for testicular cancer, V:3258 Citalopram, for anxiety, I:231 Citrate, in plasmapheresis, IV:2619 Citric acid, in semen analysis, IV:2995 Citronella for filariasis prevention, II:1331 as insecticide, I:350 Citrucel. See Methylcellulose Citrus aurantium. See Bitter orange Citrus bergamia. See Bergamot Citrus oil, for palpitations, IV:2466 Citrus seed, for blastomycosis, I:513 Citrus seed extract for food poisoning, II:1356 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 Citrus sinensis. See Sweet orange CIWA-Ar, V:3573 CJD. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 3700 CK. See Creatine kinase Cladribine alemtuzumab and, I:102 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 Clap (Slang). See Gonorrhea Clapping. See Percussion Clarithromycin, I:241, 242, II:1232 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antimigraine agents, I:291 with cisapride, I:273 for gastritis, III:1407 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 Claritin. See Loratadine Clarity, in visual impairment, V:3509 Clary sage, in aromatherapy, I:349 Classical yoga. See Yoga Claustrophobia anxiety with, I:319 with CT scan, II:968–969 from MRI, III:2084 Clavicles, in rotator cuff injuries, IV:2920 Clavulanate potassium, for animal bite infections, I:207 Cleansers and protectors (Herbal medicine), III:1619 Clear cell adenocarcinoma. See Adenocarcinoma Cleavers (Plant) for dermatitis, II:1038 for mumps, III:2256 for nephritis, IV:2334 for otitis media, IV:2435 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for strep throat, IV:3179 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Cleft lip and palate, II:818–820, 819 from DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1071 from Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 genetic/environmental causes, I:492 from radiation, I:490 T & A and, V:3325 velopharyngeal insufficiency from, V:3489 Clemastine for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:118, 278 Clemastine fumarate with dicyclomine, I:309 Clenched fist injury, I:498, 500, II:820–822 Cleocin. See Clindamycin Cleocin-T. See Clindamycin Clergyman’s knee. See Bursitis Climate dehydration from, II:1016 in hypothermia, III:1754 with lung diseases, III:2050 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 Clindamycin, I:241 for acne, I:25 for actinomycosis, I:35 for acute lymphangitis, I:47 for anaerobic infections, I:168 antibiotic-associated colitis from, I:238 for aortic valve stenosis, I:330 for babesiosis, I:433 for cross infection, III:1675 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for furunculosis, I:537 for lung abscess, III:2039 for malaria, III:2090 for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for scarlet fever, IV:2953 for strep throat, IV:3179 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Clinical Institute Withdrawal Assessment for Alcohol, revised, V:3573 Clinical inventories. See Psychological tests Clinically severe obesity. See Morbid obesity Clinistix, for diabetes mellitus, II:1050 Clinoril. See Sulindac Clinton, Bill, III:1620 Clip ligation. See Ligation, clip Clitoral therapy device, II:1308 Clitoridectomy. See Female genital mutilation Clitoris enlarged, from congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 in female genital mutilation, II:1306 with genital herpes, III:1441 Clivis, in ear surgery, II:1124 CLL. See Chronic lymphocytic leukemia Cloacogenic carcinoma, I:170 Clock flower. See Dandelion Clodronate, for Paget’s disease, IV:2456 Clofazimine for mycobacterial infections, III:2277 with refampin and dapsone for leprosy, III:1979 Clofibrate for high cholesterol, II:787, 789 thyroxine levels and, V:3310, 3312 Clomid. See Clomiphene Clomiphene for infertility, III:1828, 1830–1831 multiple pregnancy from, III:2248 for PCOS, IV:2656 for in vitro fertilization, III:1809 Clomiphene citrate. See Clomiphene GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for RMSF prevention, IV:2911 for scabies, IV:2949, 2950 for sunburn prevention, IV:3219 for tinea, IV:2908 Clotrimazole for athlete’s foot, I:399 for balanitis, I:440 for candidiasis, II:646 for fungal infections, I:270 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Clotting disorders hemophilia, III:1582–1585, III:1583 von Willebrand disease, V:3531–3535 Clotting factor V, III:1701 Clotting factors anticoagulants for, I:250 coagulation disorders and, II:826, 827, 828, 829 in hypercoagulation, III:1701 in partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507–2508 with plasmapheresis, IV:2619 Clotting time with anticoagulants, I:250 test for, III:1778 Clove tea, for rubella, IV:2927 Cloves for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for measles, III:2140 for toothache, V:3337 Cloxacillin, for cellulitis, II:685 Clozapine for bipolar disorder, I:488 for delusions, II:1023 for dementia, II:1026 for hallucinations, III:1504 for mania, III:2113 with myasthenia gravis, III:2275 for paranoia, IV:2493 for psychosis, I:300, 301, 302, IV:2766 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 Clozaril. See Clozapine Clubbing. See Digital clubbing Clubfoot, II:822–823, 823 from Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 genetic/environmental causes, I:492 from oligohydramnios, IV:2664 Clue cells, in vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Cluster headache, II:824–826, 825f, III:1523 CMBCS. See Continuous-monitoring blood culture systems CMP. See Chondromalacia patellae CMT. See Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease CMT1B disease, II:733–734 CMT2 disease, II:734–735 CMT3 disease, II:734–735 CMT4 disease, II:734–735 CMTX disease, II:734–735 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 CMV. See Cytomegalovirus Cnidium, for acne, I:26 CNS. See Central nervous system CNS depressants. See Central nervous system depressants CNS stimulants. See Central nervous system stimulants Co-dependence, with alcoholism, I:97t, 98 CO poisoning. See Carbon monoxide poisoning Co-trimoxazole. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole Coagulation disorders. See Blood coagulation disorders Coagulopathy, consumptive. See Disseminated intravascular coagulation Coal, lung cancer from, III:2044, 2047 Coal dust black lung disease from, I:505 lung diseases from, III:2050 Coal tar for atopic dermatitis, I:404 for dermatitis, II:1038 for psoriasis, IV:2757 with ultraviolet light treatment, V:3436 Coal tar shampoo, for seborrheic dermatitis, IV:2981 Coal workers’ pneumonoconiosis. See Black lung disease Coarctation of the aorta. See Aortic coarctation Cobalamin. See Vitamin B12 Cobalt, with vitamin B12, III:2195, 2197 Cobalt therapy. See Radiation therapy Cobb angle, for scoliosis, IV:2971 Coca plant, cocaine from, II:831 Cocaine, II:831–834 abuse of, IV:3207, 3208, 3210 addiction to, I:50, I:51, IV:3207, 3208, 3209, 3210 with beta blockers, I:477 bipolar disorder from, I:486 cerebral aneurysm from, II:698 congenital brain defects from, II:891 with coronary heart disease, II:933 with cystoscopy, II:996 delirium from, II:1021 delusions from, II:1023 with general anesthetics, I:189 hemoptysis from, III:1589 for leech removal, III:1971 mania from, III:2112 myocarditis from, III:2289 overdose, II:1104 palpitations from, IV:2465 perforated septum from, IV:2535 placental abruption from, IV:2612 prematurity and, IV:2706 psychosis from, IV:2766 3701 Cocaine Clomipramine for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for paraphilias, IV:3019 for premature ejaculation, IV:3017 Clonazepam for bipolar disorder, I:488 for convulsions, I:253 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 for nocturnal myoclonus, IV:3091 for pain, IV:2460 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for phobias, I:73 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for seizures, IV:2987 Clonic torticollis. See Torticollis Clonidine for ADHD, I:412 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for narcotics withdrawal, V:3573 overdose, II:1105 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 test of for growth hormone deficiency, III:1748 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:261 Cloning, III:2247 Clonorchiasis, II:1342 Clonorchis sinensis, II:1342 Clopidogrel, as antiplatelet agent, I:250 Clorazepate, for convulsions, I:253 Closed-angle glaucoma. See Glaucoma Closed fist injury. See Clenched fist injury Closed fracture reduction. See Fracture reduction Closed fractures. See Fractures Closed head injuries, III:1520 Closed joint aspiration. See Synovial fluid analysis Clostridium, III:1393 anaerobic infections from, I:167 cultures for, V:3579 gangrene from, III:1393 Clostridium argentinense, I:560 Clostridium baratii, I:560 Clostridium botulinum, I:558 for botulinum, V:3381–3382 botulism from, I:559–560 food poisoning from, II:1353, 1354–1355 Clostridium butyricum, I:560 Clostridium difficile, I:238–239 Clostridium tetani, V:3264 Clothalidone, for heart attacks, III:1534 Clothing for dermatitis prevention, II:1039 with lice, III:1995 Cocaine pulmonary hypertension and, IV:2785 with regional anesthetics, I:191 sleep disorders from, IV:3089 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3202 withdrawal from, I:258, V:3572 with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 Coccidia, II:981 Coccidioides immitis, II:834 Coccidioidomycosis, I:152, II:834–836 Coccidiosis, IV:3095 Cocculus, for motion sickness, III:2219 Coccydynia, II:836–837 Coccygeal region. See Coccyx Coccygeal vertebrae. See Spine Coccygodynia. See Coccydynia Coccyx with herniated disk, III:1628 injuries to, II:836–837 Cochlea hair cells, II:837 Cochlear implants, II:837–839, II:1123 for hearing loss, III:1529 with MRI, III:2082 Cochlear nerve, I:27 Cockroaches, asthma from, I:380, 384 Cocksackievirus, pericarditis from, IV:2538 Cockscomb cervix, from DES exposure, II:1040 Cocoa butter, for hemorrhoids, I:275 Codeine abuse of, IV:3207 alanine aminotransferase levels from, III:2024 bilirubin levels from, III:2024 for cough, II:942 for craniotomy, II:947 for Crohn’s disease, II:959 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 vs. expectorants, II:1254 with lipase test, III:2002 overdose, II:1105 for pain, I:174, 175, IV:2460, 2463 for palliative cancer therapy, II:642 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 Codeine phosphate, for fecal incontinence, II:1301 Coenzyme Q, IV:2395 Coenzyme Q10, I:71, III:1648 Coenzyme R. See Biotin Coffee in bowel function, I:565 colic from, II:847 with dehydration, II:1018 tinnitus and, V:3323 See also Caffeine Cogentin. See Benztropin Cognex. See Tacrine Cognition disorders conduct disorder from, II:883 3702 in dementia, II:1025 with group therapy, III:1485 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 from heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 from hypocalcemia, III:1732 from multiple sclerosis, III:2251 from postconcussion syndrome, III:1521 Cognition tests. See Intelligence tests Cognitive behavior therapy. See Cognitive therapy Cognitive therapy, II:839–843 for ADHD, I:412 for amnesia, I:152 for anxiety, I:321 for binge eating disorder, I:481, 482 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for bulimia, I:613 for children, II:764 for cocaine addiction, II:833 for delusions, II:1023 for depression, II:1035 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 in group therapy, III:1485 for IBS, III:1867 for mood disorders, III:2217 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2381–2382 for panic disorder, IV:2482 for paranoia, IV:2493 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for phobias, I:73, IV:2582–2583 for psychosocial disorders, IV:2768 for PTSD, IV:2686 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2980 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 for stress, IV:3186 for substance abuse, IV:3210 Coinfection. See Comorbidity Coitus. See Sexual intercourse Coke syrup, for nausea, IV:2326 COL2A1 gene, IV:2416 COL3A1 gene, II:1138 Colace. See Docusate Colbenemid. See Colchicine Colchicine for amyloidosis, I:162, 163 for gout, I:282, III:1477, 1479 Colchicum, for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 Cold, common. See Common cold Cold (Temperature) hypothermia from, III:1753–1755 with inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 itching from, III:1875 physical allergy from, IV:2591–2592 psoriasis from, IV:2756 with rosacea, IV:2918 Cold agglutinins test, II:843–844, III:2278 Cold antibody hemolytic anemia. See Autoimmune hemolytic anemia Cold compresses. See Compresses Cold/heat application. See Heat/cold application Cold-induced asthma. See Asthma Cold knife cone biopsy. See Cone biopsy Cold sore, II:844–846 vs. genital herpes, III:1440 from herpes simplex, IV:3020 keratitis from, III:1904 laser surgery for, III:1960 local anesthesia for, I:190 stomatitis with, IV:3170 Cold spots, with thallium heart scan, V:3278 Cold therapy. See Cryotherapy Colectomy for Crohn’s disease, II:959 for intestinal polyps prevention, III:1851 for ulcerative colitis, V:3431 Coleman, Ellen, I:402 Colesevalam, for high cholesterol, II:789 Colestid. See Colestipol Colestipol with digitalis, II:1074 with diuretics, II:1090 for high cholesterol, II:789, 790 with tetracyclines, V:3268 thyroid hormones and, V:3314 COLIA1 gene, IV:2416 COLIA2 gene, IV:2416 Colic, II:847–848 Colitis with albinism, I:90 from ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 with anticancer agents, I:248 with antidiarrhea drugs, I:265 from balantidiasis, I:440, 441 with cephalosporins, II:694 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 diarrhea from, II:1066 E. coli infections and, II:1236 E. coli infections from, II:1235 from hypoglycemia, III:1735 vs. lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 with methadone, III:2182 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with opioid analgesics, I:177 with penicillins, IV:2528 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 ulcerative (See Ulcerative colitis) Collagen in bones, I:544 keloids from, III:1903 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Colonoscopy, II:856–859, 857f for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239 vs. barium enema, I:448 bowel preparation for, I:562–563 for colon cancer, II:851 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 for IBS, III:1866 for intestinal polyps, III:1851 for rectal cancer, IV:2830 for rectal polyps, IV:2834 vs. sigmoidoscopy, IV:3049 Colony count, microbial, V:3444 Colony immunoblot assays, for E. coli, II:1236, 1237 Colony stimulating factors for bone marrow suppression, II:642, 643, 644–645, 742 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647–1648 in immunotherapy, III:1791, 1792 Color blindness, II:859–860 nystagmus from, IV:2372 in visual impairment, V:3510 Color perception with macular degeneration, III:2076 testing of, for amblyopia, I:142 Color therapy, for fatigue, II:1297–1298 Color vision. See Color perception Colorado cough root. See Osha Colorado tick fever, II:1178 Colorectal cancer barium enema for, I:447 carcinoembryonic antigen in, V:3413 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 colonoscopy for, II:856 colostomy for, II:861 constipation from, II:906 digital rectal examination for, IV:2833 ethnic differences in, III:2199 familial polyposis and, II:1285 FOBT for, II:1302–1303 hereditary nonpolyposis, II:1188–1189, 1191 iron deficiency anemia from, III:1860 sigmoidoscopy for, II:634, IV:3049–3051 Colorectal polyps anoscopy for, I:214 sigmoidoscopy for, I:562 Colostomy, II:861–864, 862f for anal atresia, I:169 with anal cancer, I:171 bacteremia from, I:436 with bowel resection, I:563 for colon cancer, II:853 defined, IV:2429 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1093 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for Hirschsprung’s disease, III:1635–1636 Colposcopy, II:864–866 for cervical cancer, II:712 with cervicitis, II:723 for DES exposure, II:1040 after pap smear, IV:2485, 2487 after pelvic exam, IV:2519 Colyte. See Enema Coma, II:866–869, 867f from acidosis, III:2179 airway obstruction by, III:1999 from arbovirus encephalitis, I:347 from bartonellosis, I:452 breathing capacity and, III:1999 from cough suppressants, II:944 from diethylcarbamazine, II:1331 from drug overdose, II:1104, 1105, 1106 from electrolyte disorders, II:1156 enteral nutrition for, V:3400 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 from head injuries, III:1521 from hypercalcemia, II:1158, III:1697 from hypernatremia, III:1710 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 from hypoglycemia, I:530 from hyponatremia, III:1743 from hypothermia, III:1754 induced, with barbiturates, I:443–444 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 from lead poisoning, III:1965, 1966 from liver cirrhosis, II:814 from liver encephalopathy, III:2022–2024 from magnesium poisoning, III:2079 from measles, III:2139 from metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 from mineral toxicity, III:2194 from near drowning, IV:2327–2328 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2006 overhydration and, IV:2449 from stroke, IV:3194 from thyroid crisis, III:1724 from typhoid, V:3422 vs. vegetative state, V:3488 from Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3544 from Wernicke’s syndrome, III:1930 Combination chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Combination drug therapy for AIDS, I:80, 81 with antiretroviral drugs, I:303, 304 for cancer, II:740, 741 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:886 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 3703 Combination drug therapy osteogenesis imperfecta and, IV:2416 scleroderma and, IV:2966, 2967 Collagen diseases lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 with radiation therapy, III:2036 Collagen injections for acne, I:26 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Collagen-vascular diseases autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 indigestion from, III:1813 placental abruption from, IV:2612 pleural biopsy for, IV:2627 with radiation therapy, III:2130 Collapsed lung. See Atelectasis Collarbone. See Clavicles Colon biopsy of, II:1286 with Chagas’ disease, II:727 in Crohn’s disease, II:956 in diarrhea, II:1066 diseases of (See Colonic diseases) in diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1090–1091 polyps (See Colonic polyps) surgery of, II:728 tumors of, II:856 Colon cancer, II:631, 632, 633, II:848–854, 851f barium enema for, I:447 bowel function and, I:565 brain tumor from, I:569 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 from colitis, II:1209 colonic irrigation for, II:854–855 colonoscopy for, II:856 colostomy for, II:861 constipation from, II:906 diarrhea from, II:1066 endocarditis from, II:1183 endometrial cancer and, II:1189 liver cancer from, III:2019 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 from obesity, IV:2373, 2378 from rectal polyps, IV:2834 senior’s health and, IV:2996, 2999 sigmoidoscopy for, I:562, IV:3049–3051 with ulcerative colitis, V:3430 See also Colorectal cancer Colonic. See Colonic irrigation Colonic diseases bowel preparation for, I:562–563 colostomy for, II:861 enterostomy for, II:1209 Colonic irrigation, II:854–856 Colonic polyps, III:1850 colonoscopy for, II:856 familial polyposis and, II:1285 Combination drug therapy for emphysema, II:1173 for high cholesterol, II:789 for melanoma, III:2099 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 for sedation, IV:2983 for smoking cessation, IV:3109 for tuberculosis, I:310 Combipres. See Clonidine Comedolytics, for acne, I:25 Comedones drugs for, I:226 extraction of, I:26 See also Acne Comfrey for burns, I:619 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 Commiphora abyssinica. See Myrrh Commiphora mukeul. See Gugulipid Commiphora myrrha. See Myrrh Commission E (Germany), III:1620 Committee on Infectious Diseases, of American Academy of Pediatrics, V:3265 Common bile duct. See Bile ducts Common buckthorn. See Buckthorn Common cold, II:869–872 acetaminophen for, I:18 in acrocyanosis, I:31 aspirin for, I:378 asthma from, I:380 conjunctivitis from, II:903 cough from, II:941 cough suppressants for, II:943–944 croup from, II:960 cyanosis from, II:980 decongestants for, II:1010–1013 dizziness from, II:1095 facial paralysis and, I:461 labyrinthitis from, III:1935–1936 laryngitis from, III:1957–1958 with penicillins, IV:2528 Reye’s syndrome after, IV:2895 vs. RSV, IV:2867 vs. sinusitis, IV:3058 sore throat from, IV:3117, 3118 before sudden infant death syndrome, IV:3213 with ventricular septal defect, V:3500 vitamin C for, V:3526 Common honeysuckle. See Honeysuckle Common hop. See Hops Common migraine. See Migraine Common plantain. See Plantain Common variable immunodeficiency, II:872–873, III:1785, 1786, 1787, 1790 Common warts, V:3547–3551 Communicable diseases vs. autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 autopsy and, I:426 3704 blood transfusions and, V:3367, 3369 with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 with common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 infection control for, III:1821–1823 life support and, III:2001 from piercing and tattoos, IV:2599 polymyositis and, IV:2667 seizures from, IV:2986 from sickle cell disease, IV:3042–3043 stillbirth from, IV:3163 zoonosis, V:3599–3600 Communicating hydrocephalus. See Hydrocephalus Communication with art, I:368 with cochlear implants, II:839 in families, II:1288 in sex therapy, IV:3014 Communication aids after laryngectomy, III:1956 for laryngectomy, III:1952 Communication disorders auditory integration training for, I:417 with autism, I:418 family therapy for, II:1288 from mental retardation, III:2173 vs. mutism, III:2271–2272 from pervasive developmental disorder, IV:2568 Community-acquired pneumonia. See Mycoplasma pneumonia Community mental health services, III:2175 Comorbidity of hepatitis B and D, III:1605 Compartment syndrome from fractures, II:1365 with sports injuries, IV:3146 Compass plant. See Rosemary Compazine. See Prochlorperazine Compensated cirrhosis. See Liver cirrhosis Complement deficiencies, II:873–875 Complement fixation tests in hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1776 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 for melioidosis, III:2151 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for parrot fever, IV:2506 for scrub typhus, IV:2976 Complete blood count, I:521–522 for ABPA, I:108 for acute leukemia, III:1988 for AIDS, I:80, 83–84, 83–85, 86–87 alpha1-adrenergic blockers and, I:129 anticonvulsants and, I:253 antirheumatic drugs and, I:306–307 with chemotherapy, II:741 with chronic leukemia, III:1992 clozapine and, I:302 for colon cancer, II:851 complete (See Complete blood count) for cross infection, III:1675 for diarrhea, II:1066 for E. coli, II:1236 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 after heart transplantation, III:1547 hemoglobin test with, III:1576 for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 for immunologic diseases, III:1786 for leukocytosis, III:1993 for melanoma, III:2097 with neurologic examination, IV:2352 for pericarditis, IV:2539 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for pyelonephritis, IV:2789 for pyruvate kinase deficiency, IV:2795 with red blood cell indices, IV:2838 for retinal vein occlusion, IV:2879 for sarcomas, IV:2943 for tinnitus, V:3323 Wilm’s tumor for, V:3565 Complete breech. See Breech birth Complete dentures. See Dentures Complete fractures. See Fractures Complete heart block. See Heart block Complete molar pregnancy. See Hydatidiform mole Complete pituitary failure. See Panhypopituitarism Complete proteins, vegetarianism and, V:3486 Complex carbohydrates. See Carbohydrates Complex partial seizures, IV:2985–2986 Complex tics. See Tic disorders Complicated cataracts, II:673 Composite resin, for fillings, V:3334 Compound fractures. See Fractures Compound moles. See Nevus Comprazine, for nausea, IV:2812 Comprehension disorders, II:1025 Compresses for angiomas, I:496 aromatherapy in, I:350 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for aspergillosis, I:376 for atelectasis, I:390 vs. autopsy, I:426 for battered child syndrome, I:453 for bile duct cancer, I:478 with biopsy, I:567–568, II:968–969 for bladder cancer, I:508 with bone biopsy, I:538 for bone density testing, I:540 for botulism, I:561 for brain abscess, I:566 for brain tumor, I:571, 572 for breast cancer, I:580 for bronchiectasis, I:597 for Budd-Chiari syndrome, I:610 for cancer, II:634, 636 with carcinoembryonic antigen test, II:653 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 for cellulitis, II:685 for cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 for cerebral aneurysm, II:699 for cervical disk disease, II:718 before chemonucleolysis, II:739 for chest drainage therapy, II:744 for cholangitis, II:774 for cholestasis, II:785 for choriocarcinomas, II:797 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for CNS infections, II:690 for colon cancer, II:851 for concussion, II:879 for congenital brain defects, II:891 for congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 for craniotomy, II:946 for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 for cystitis, II:993 for delirium, II:1022 for dementia, II:1026 for detached retina, IV:2877 for disk removal, II:1081 for dizziness, II:1095 for electric shock injuries, II:1144 for encephalitis, II:1178 for endocrine pancreatic cancer, IV:2472 for endometriosis, II:1193 for esophageal cancer, II:1240 for exophthalmos, II:1253 fever and, II:1315 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for fluke infection, II:1344 forechinococcosis, II:1128 for fractures, II:1364 FUO and, II:1318 for gallbladder cancer, III:1379 for gangrene, III:1394 for gastrectomy, III:1398 for head and neck cancer, III:1516 for head injuries, III:1521 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for headache, III:1524 for hemoptysis, III:1589 for herniated disk, III:1628 for hirsutism, III:1637 for histiocytosis, III:1639 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 in homeostasis monitoring, III:2000 for hydrocephalus, III:1687 for hydronephrosis, III:1689 for hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 for hypersplenism, III:1719 for hyperthyroidism, III:1724 for hypopituitarism, III:1748 for hypothermia, III:1754 for ileus, III:1779 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 vs. intravenous urography, III:1855 ionizing radiation in, IV:2807 for jaundice, III:1883 with kidney biopsy, III:1908 for kidney cancer, III:1910 vs. kidney scans, III:1914 for laryngeal cancer, III:1951 with liver biopsy, III:2017 for liver cancer, III:2020 for liver cirrhosis, II:816–817 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 lumbar puncture and, II:707 for lung abscess, III:2039 for lung cancer, III:2044, 2048 with lymphedema, III:2067 for lymphomas, III:2093 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 for mastoiditis, III:2134 vs. mediastinoscopy, III:2144 for melanoma, III:2097 with mental status examination, III:2178 for migraines, III:2188 for movement disorders, III:2222 vs. MRI, III:2082 for mucormycosis, III:2232 for multiple myeloma, III:2241 for multiple sclerosis, V:3381 for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 with myelography, III:2284 for nasal trauma, IV:2318 for neuroblastoma, IV:2341 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 for orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2407 for orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 for osteoarthritis, IV:2413 for osteoporosis, IV:2426 for otitis externa, IV:2432 for ovarian cancer, IV:2440 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2474 for pancreatitis, IV:2479 for paralysis, IV:2492 for parathyroidectomy, IV:2497 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 3705 Computed tomography scan for Bartholin’s gland cysts, I:450 for breast infections, II:1325 for bruises, I:608 for contact dermititis, II:909 for cooling treatment, II:915 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for dental trauma, II:1029 for eyelid diseases, II:1272 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 in hydrotherapy, III:1691, 1693 for itching, III:1875 for lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1939 for physical allergy, IV:2592 for shingles, IV:3032 for skin resurfacing, IV:3081 for sports injuries, IV:3146 for sunburn, IV:3218 for toothache, V:3337 for tracheotomy, V:3354 See also Heat/cold application Compression with inert gas narcosis, IV:2356–2357 intermittent pneumatic (See Intermittent pneumatic compression) for keloid prevention, III:1903 nerve (See Nerve compression) test, with TCD, V:3364 Compression stockings. See Elastic stockings Compulsive gambling disorder, III:1807–1808 Computed tomography angiography, IV:2475 Computed tomography myelography, II:721 Computed tomography scan, II:875–878, II:876, II:876, 877 with abdominal x-rays, III:1923 for ABPA, I:108 with abscess drainage, I:15 for acute kidney failure, I:45 for acute leukemia, III:1988 for adrenal gland cancer, I:60 with adrenalectomy, I:63 for AIDS, I:80 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for Alzheimer’s disease, IV:3000 for amebiasis, I:145 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 for anal atresia, I:169 for angiomas, I:495 for aortic dissection, I:327 for aphasia, I:335 for appendicitis, I:342 for arteriovenous malformations, I:358 for asbestosis, I:370 for ascites, I:372 Computed tomography scan for pericarditis, IV:2539 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2579 for Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597 for pituitary tumors, IV:2607 for pleural effusion, IV:2629 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for precocious puberty, IV:2691 for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 for prostate cancer, IV:2731 for puberty disorders, IV:2773 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 before radiation therapy, IV:2812 for renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 for renal vein thrombosis, IV:2859 for restrictive cardiomyopathy, IV:2873 for retinoblastoma, IV:2884 for sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 for salivary gland tumors, IV:2934 for sarcomas, IV:2943, 2944 for schistosomiasis, IV:2955 for sciatica, IV:2964 sedation for, IV:2983 for shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 for sinusitis, IV:3058 for situs inversus, IV:3060 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 for spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 for spinal stenosis, IV:3136 for splenectomy, IV:3139 for splenic trauma, IV:3141, 3142 for stomach cancer, IV:3165 for stroke, IV:3195 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 for subdural hematoma, IV:3205 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for tapeworm disease, V:3240 for tapeworms, V:3240–3241 before thoracic surgery, V:3288 for thymoma, V:3302 for thyroid cancer, V:3306 for thyroidectomy, V:3317 for TIA, III:1869, V:3371 for tinnitus, V:3323 for tremor, V:3381 for ventricular shunts, V:3502 for vitrectomy, V:3528 for vocal cord paralysis, V:3531 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 for Wilm’s tumor, V:3565 Computerized axial tomography scan. See Computed tomography scan Comtan. See Entacapone Concentration meditation. See Meditation Concussion, II:878–880, III:1519–1523 from maxillofacial trauma, III:2135 3706 nystagmus from, IV:2372 post-concussion syndrome from, IV:2678 sports-related, IV:3146 Condoms, II:880–882, 881f for cervicitis prevention, II:723 for chancroid prevention, II:730 for contraception, II:911 for epididymitis prevention, II:1219 for genital warts prevention, III:1445 for gonorrhea prevention, III:1472, 1474 for hepatitis B, III:1602 for hepatitis C prevention, III:1604 for immunologic diseases prevention, III:1787 for nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 vs. oral contraceptives, IV:2401 for perinatal infection prevention, IV:2543 for proctitis prevention, IV:2719 for Reiter’s syndrome prevention, IV:2852 for skin lesions prevention, IV:3077 for STD prevention, IV:3023 for syphilis prevention, IV:3230 for trichomoniasis prevention, V:3388 with vulvovaginitis, V:3542 for wart prevention, V:3550 Conduct disorders, II:883–884 from ADHD, I:413 in gays and lesbians, III:1416 Conduction aphasia, I:334 Conduction heat transfer. See Heat treatment Conductive hearing loss. See Hearing loss Condyloma acuminata. See Genital warts Condylomata lata, IV:3228 Condylox. See Podofilox Cone biopsy for cervical cancer, II:713, IV:2487 for cervicitis, II:723 with colposcopy, II:865 See also Cervical conization Cone head, in childbirth, I:594 Coneflower, for onychomycosis, IV:2391 Cones (Retina), V:3512 Confabulation, in Korsakoff’s syndrome, I:92, III:1930 Confidentiality, in group therapy, III:1485 Confinement, psychiatric, IV:2760 Confucian qigong. See Qigong Confusion antimalarials and, I:288 from arbovirus encephalitis, I:347 from benzodiazepines, I:467 from CO poisoning, II:652 from concussion, II:879 from cross infection, III:1674 from diabetes insipidus, II:1047 from dizziness, II:1094 from heat stress disorders, III:1557 from hypercalcemia, III:1697 from hypernatremia, III:1710, 2194 from hypothermia, III:1754 from joint replacement, III:1892 from liver encephalopathy, III:2023 nausea with, IV:2324 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 from overhydration, IV:2449 from postconcussion syndrome, III:1521 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 Congenital abnormalities. See Birth defects Congenital addictions, II:833 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:884–886, III:1847 Congenital afibrinogenemia, II:1320–1321 Congenital amputation, II:887–888 Congenital anomalies. See Birth defects Congenital atresia ear surgery for, II:1124 surgery for, II:1124 Congenital bladder anomalies, II:888–889 Congenital brain defects, II:889–892 arteriovenous malformations as, I:357 with autism, II:765 biopsy for, I:567–568 CAT scan for, II:877 mental retardation from, III:2174 skull x-rays for, IV:3082 vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 Congenital cataracts, II:673 Congenital disorders. See Birth defects Congenital ear defect surgery, II:1124 Congenital erythropoietic porphyria, IV:2671, 2674 Congenital glaucoma. See Glaucoma Congenital heart defects, II:899–902 2,3-DPG test for, V:3420 amantidine with, II:1370 with aortic coarctation, II:830 athletic heart syndrome from, I:400 atrial septal (See Atrial septal defects) bundle branch block from, I:614 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 from cri du chat syndrome, II:954–955 cyanosis from, II:980 detected by MUGA scan, III:2233 with DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1071, 1072 with Down syndrome, II:1099, 1100 Down syndrome and, I:492 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Congenital myopathy, II:1159 Congenital myotonic dystrophy, III:2301 Congenital nevi. See Nevus Congenital nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia, V:3420 Congenital porphyria. See Congenital erythropoietic porphyria Congenital rubella syndrome, IV:2927 Congenital scoliosis, IV:2971 Congenital syphilis, IV:3021, 3228 Congenital thymic hypoplasia. See DiGeorge’s syndrome Congenital thyroid deficiency. See Cretinism Congenital toxoplasmosis, V:3349 Congenital ureter anomalies, II:894–896 Congenital vein diseases, V:3492 Congestion, decongestants for, II:1010–1013 Congestive cardiomyopathy, II:896–899 Congestive heart failure, III:1537–1541 with aldosteronism, I:101 from anorexia nervosa, I:212 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 cardiac rehabilitation for, II:659 chest x-ray for, II:747 from congenital heart disease, II:900 from congestive cardiomyopathy, II:896 detected by MUGA scan, III:2233 digitalis for, II:1073 diuretics for, II:1088 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 embolism from, II:1169 from folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 with gout drugs, III:1480 from heart surgery, III:1544 from heart valve repair, III:1550 hemoglobin test for, III:1577 from hypertension, II:929–930 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 with manual lymph drainage, II:1136 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 from myocarditis, III:2290 oxygen therapy for, III:1838 with penicillins, IV:2528 pericardial effusion from, IV:2536 pleural effusion from, IV:2628–2629 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 from restrictive cardiomyopathy, IV:2872 with sibutramine, IV:2376 from sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 from silicosis, IV:3055 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from tricuspid valve insufficiency, V:3389 urinalysis for, V:3445 wheezing from, V:3554 See also Heart failure Congophilic angiopathy. See Cerebral amyloid angiopathy Conization, for cervical cancer, IV:2487 Conjoined twins, III:2247 Conjugated bilirubin. See Bilirubin Conjunctiva drying in, V:3512 infections of, II:902–905 pinguecula and pterygium, IV:2601–2602 scarring of, V:3355, 3356 slit lamp examination for, II:1263 Conjunctiva filariasis, II:1330 Conjunctivitis, II:902–905, 904f from adenovirus infections, I:56, 57 from allergens, I:115, 116 from Bartonella henselae, II:670 corneal ulcers from, II:921 granular (See Trachoma) from hemophilus infections, III:1586 inclusion, III:1811 with keratitis, III:1904 orbital and periorbital cellulitis from, IV:2407 from scrub typhus, IV:2976 with sore throat, IV:3118 vs. uveitis, V:3462 Connective tissue abnormalities fibromyalgia, II:1326–1328 from port wine stains, I:494 aging theory, I:70 CAT scan of, II:877 diseases of (See Connective tissue diseases) in dislocations and subluxations, II:1083 heat treatment for, III:1559–1560 injuries to, II:1029, 1362, 1364, 1365 Connective tissue diseases aortic dissection with, I:327 from breast implants, I:586, 589 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, II:1137–1142 heart valve diseases from, V:3474 joint replacement for, III:1890 from mucormycosis, III:2232 orthopedic surgery for, IV:2410 paresthesia from, IV:2365 platelet aggregation test for, IV:2624 pleural effusion from, IV:2628, 2629 with relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 tricuspid valve stenosis from, V:3390 3707 Connective tissue disease echocardiography for, II:1129 embolism from, II:1169 endocarditis with, II:1183 from fetal alcohol syndrome, I:490, II:1310 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 genetic causes, I:492 heart failure from, III:1538 heart murmurs from, III:1541 heart valve diseases from, V:3472 heart valve repair for, III:1549 from holoprosencephaly, II:890 hypercoagulation from, III:1701 miscarriage from, III:2204 mitral valve stenosis as, III:2209 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 from Patau syndrome, IV:2510 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 from prematurity, IV:2706 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 pulmonary hypertension from, IV:2785 from rubella, IV:2541 situs inversus and, IV:3060, 3061 surgery for, III:1542–1545 transposition of the great arteries as, V:3373 from Turner syndrome, V:3418 ultrasonography for, I:4 Valsalva maneuver for, V:3471 ventricular septal defect from, V:3500 Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome from, V:3574 See also Pulmonary valve stenosis; Tetralogy of Fallot Congenital heart disease. See Congenital heart defects Congenital hemangioma, I:494, 496 Congenital hematoporphyria. See Congenital erythropoietic porphyria Congenital hip dysplasia, II:892–893, II:1084 Congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium, II:1285 Congenital immunodeficiency diseases, III:1785 B lymphocyte deficiency (See B lymphocyte deficiency) X-linked agammaglobulinemia (See X-linked agammaglobulinemia) Congenital lobar emphysema, II:893–894 Congenital megacolon. See Hirschsprung’s disease Congenital methemoglobinemia. See methemoglobinemia Congenital microtia, ear surgery for, II:1124 Congenital muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267 Connective tissue disease with warm antibody hemolytic anemia, I:181 Conners Rating Scales, I:411–412 Conn’s syndrome. See Hyperaldosteronism Conrad, Emilie, III:2227 Conscious sedation. See Sedation Consciousness loss of, from fluoroquinolones, II:1345, 1346 with stridor, IV:3193 in sudden cardiac death, IV:3212 Consciousness-raising groups, III:1677 Consent. See Informed consent Consound. See Comfrey Constipation, II:905–908, 907f activated charcoal for, I:368, II:731 with anal atresia, I:169 from analgesics, I:174, 175 from anorexia nervosa, I:212 from antacids, I:218, 219 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 bed-wetting from, I:454 bowel training for, I:565 from Chagas’ disease, II:728 from cholesterol-reducing agents, II:790, 791 chronic digital rectal examination for, IV:2833 rectal prolapse from, IV:2835, 2836 from dronabinol, II:645 enemas for, II:1199 from enteral nutrition, V:3402 with epididymitis, II:1219 from geophagia, IV:2596 hemorrhoids from, I:210–211 from hypercalcemia, III:1697 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 from hysterectomy, III:1763 from IBS, III:1865, 1867 laxatives for, III:1963–1964 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 from pregnancy, IV:2696 sitz bath for, IV:3062 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 Constitutional homeopathy. See Homeopathy Constitutional prescribing, III:1659–1663 Constitutional syndromes, with myxoma, III:2306 Constrictive pericarditis, I:372, IV:2538–2539 Consumer Reports, on Korean ginseng, III:1457 Consumption (Disease). See Tuberculosis Consumption coagulopathy. See Disseminated intravascular coagulation 3708 Contact dermatitis, I:115, 116, 118, 121, II:908–910, II:1036–1037 from aromatherapy, I:352 vs. cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976 from diaper rash, II:1062 due to vitamin E, II:691 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 itching from, III:1874 with keratosis pilaris, III:1907 from piercing and tattoos, IV:2599 rashes from, IV:2820 Contact dissolution, for gallstones, III:1390 Contact lens implants, III:1712 Contact lenses, II:1265–1268, II:1268 for albinism, I:91 for astigmatism, I:385–386 for cataracts, II:675 conjunctivitis from, II:903 corneal abrasion from, II:918 corneal ulcers from, II:921 for hyperopia, III:1712 keratitis from, III:1904 laser eye surgery and, IV:2587 for myopia, III:2298 for nystagmus, IV:2372 for presbyopia, IV:2714 after radial keratotomy, IV:2806 with tarsorrhaphy, V:3243 vs. visual impairment, V:3509 Contact precautions. See Universal precautions Contaminated food. See Food contamination Continent ileostomy. See Koch pouch Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis. See Peritoneal dialysis Continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis. See Peritoneal dialysis Continuous flow centrifugation, IV:2619 Continuous-monitoring blood culture systems, I:523 Continuous passive motion machines, II:913 Continuous positive airway pressure ventilation, III:1837–1841, IV:3112 for COPD, II:811 for respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 for sleep apnea, IV:3085, 3092 for sleep disorders, IV:3000 Continuous renal replacement therapy. See Hemodialysis Contraception, II:910–913, 911t condoms for, II:880–882 diaphragms for, II:1064 emergency, I:9–10 with isotretinoin, I:227 IUDs for, III:1876 for pregnancy prevention, IV:2698 for STD prevention, IV:3023 synthetic hormones for, II:1031–1032 vasectomy for, V:3481–3482 See also Birth control; Oral contraceptives Contraceptives barrier (See Barrier contraceptives) Depo-Provera (See Depo-Provera) with dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112, 1113 Injectable (See Injectable contraceptives) IUDs, III:1876 Norplant (See Norplant) with oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 oral (See Oral contraceptives) Contraction stress test, I:221–223 Contractions. See Labor Contracture, II:913–914 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 from arthritis, III:1893 capsular (See Capsular contracture) electrical stimulation for, IV:3130 from muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2266, 2266 from nerve damage, III:2260 range of motion for, IV:3131 of skin grafts, IV:3069 with spinal cord injuries, IV:3129, 3131 after stroke, IV:3197 from torticollis, V:3340 Contralateral routing of signal. See CROS hearing aids Contrast hydrotherapy. See Heat/cold application Contrast media in CAT scan, II:875, 876 for coronary angiography, II:930 with endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1198 for gallbladder x-ray, III:1382, 1383 for hydronephrosis, III:1689 for jaundice, III:1883 kidney damage from, IV:2337 for lymphatic system diseases, III:2066 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Contrast sensitivity with cataracts, II:674 in visual impairment, V:3510 Contrast venography. See Venography Contrecoup injury, III:1520 Control (Psychology), I:212 Contusions from chemotherapy, II:742 with chronic leukemia, III:1992 cooling treatments for, II:913–914 with erythema nodosum, II:1227 with fractures, II:1363 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Copaxone Autoject, III:2252–2253 COPD. See Chronic obstructive lung disease Coping, group therapy for, III:1485 Copper deficiency of, III:2190–2193 in IUDs, III:1876 jaundice from, III:1882 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 metabolism of, V:3566–3567 poisoning, III:1560–1561 supplements of, III:2196 toxicity, III:2194–2195 Coprolalia, from Tourette syndrome, V:3342, 3343 Coproporphyrinogen oxidase, IV:2673 Copropraxia, from Tourette syndrome, V:3342 Cor pulmonale, II:916–918 atrial fibrillation from, I:407 from black lung disease, I:505 lung transplantation for, III:2054 Coral, lead poisoning from, III:1965 Cord blood cells, in sickle cell disease, IV:3047 Cordarone. See Amiodarone Coreg. See Carvedilol Corgard. See Nadolol Coriolus versicolor, cancer and, II:1191 Cori’s disease. See Glycogen storage diseases Corkscrew esophagus. See Diffuse esophageal spasm Corn silk, for cystitis, II:994 Cornea in astigmatism, I:384 with contact lenses, II:1265, 1267 degeneration of, V:3511 drying in (See Xerophthalmia) in Fabry’s disease, III:2003 in glaucoma, III:1457–1458, 1459 neurologic examination for, IV:2351 radial keratotomy and, IV:2803 in rosacea, IV:2917 slit lamp examination for, II:1263 tarsorrhaphy and, V:3243 Corneal abrasion, I:385, II:918–919 Corneal damage, II:1267, 1268 Corneal disorders from aspergillosis, I:375 corneal transplant for, II:919 Corneal injuries abrasions (See Corneal abrasion) astigmatism from, I:385 corneal transplant for, II:919 keratitis from, III:1904 from laser surgery, III:1962 Corneal scarring laser eye surgery and, IV:2588 from trachoma, V:3355, 3356 Corneal transplantation, II:919–921 for astigmatism, I:386 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for corneal ulcers, II:922 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from, II:951 for trachoma, V:3356 Corneal ulcers, II:921–923 vs. corneal abrasion, II:918 from keratitis, III:1906 from Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3063 tarsorrhaphy with, V:3243 Corns, II:923–925 Cornsilk for bladder stones, I:511 for urethritis, V:3441 Cornstarch, for dermatitis, V:3281 Coronary allograft vascular disease, III:1549 Coronary angiography, I:198, III:1869 Coronary angioplasty. See Balloon angioplasty; Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty Coronary arteries in atherosclerosis, I:394, 395 in atrial septal defects, I:409 in congenital heart disease, II:899–900 in coronary heart disease, II:928–929 embolism in, IV:2780 in heart attacks, III:1532 stenting of (See Coronary stenting) Coronary artery bypass, II:925–928, 926f acute lymphangitis and, I:47 for angina pectoris, I:195 for aortic dissection, I:327 with atherectomy, I:391 for atherosclerosis, I:396 with cardiac catheterization, II:656 cardiac rehabilitation for, II:659 with cellulitis, II:684 for coronary heart disease, II:932, 934 vs. endarterectomy, II:1182 for heart attacks, III:1534 with heart transplantation, III:1549 with heart valve replacement, III:1551 for ischemia, III:1870 MUGA scan for, III:2233 platelet aggregation test for, IV:2623 thallium heart scan after, V:3277 venography for, V:3492 for ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 Coronary artery bypass grafting. See Coronary artery bypass Coronary artery disease. See Coronary heart disease Coronary atherectomy. See Atherectomy Coronary heart disease, II:928–934 with antimigraine agents, I:290 anxiety with, I:318 with aortic valve stenosis, I:330 3709 Coronary heart disease intracerebral (See Intracerebral contusion) from malnutrition, III:2104 from nasal trauma, IV:2317 splenic (See Splenic trauma) sports-related, IV:3145 from vasculitis, V:3478 vitamin K deficiency and, V:3519 Convection heat transfer. See Heat treatment Conventional surgery. See Surgery Convergence (Eye). See Ocular convergence Conversion disorder, III:1764, IV:3114 dissociative disorders with, II:1085 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 Conversion heat transfer. See Heat treatment Convulsions bronchodilators with, I:602 with cholinergic agents, II:795 from conversion disorder, IV:3114 drugs for (See Anticonvulsants) from electrolyte imbalances, II:1158 with fluroquinolones, I:242 with gastric lavage, IV:3169 from hyperbaric oxygen therapy, III:1395 from hypermagnesemia, II:1158 with hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 from iron toxicity, III:2194 from magnesium deficiency, III:2190 from metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 with nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 with opioid analgesics, I:177 with pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2568 from poisoning, IV:2643 from theophylline, I:381 See also Seizures Cooley’s anemia. See Beta thalassemia Cooling treatments, II:914–915, IV:2999 See also Cryotherapy Coombs’ tests, II:915–916, III:1579 Coordination. See Psychomotor performance Coordination disorders from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369, 1370 from hypothermia, III:1754 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 from malnutrition, III:2104 from measles, III:2139 neurologic examination for, IV:2352 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004 from progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 from Refsum disease, III:2004 from Tay-Sachs disease, III:2004 Copaxone. See Glatiramer acetate Coronary heart disease from atherosclerosis, I:394 cardiac blood pool scan for, II:654 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:896 detected by MUGA scan, III:2233, 2234 echocardiography for, II:1129 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1163 exercise for preventing, II:1249 exercise test for, IV:3191–3193 gallstones from, III:1388 heart attacks from, III:1532 heart failure from, III:1538 with heart transplantation, III:1545, 1549 with laser surgery, III:1959 lipoproteins test for, III:2006–2008 magnesium and, III:2078 in men, III:2166 from obesity, IV:2373 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 stenting and, II:934 surgery for, II:925 thallium heart scan for, V:3277 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 ventricular assist devices for, V:3497 ventricular tachycardia from, V:3503 Coronary stenting, II:934–935 Coronavirus infections. See Common cold Corpus callostomy, for seizures, IV:2988 Corpus luteum cysts, IV:2445–2446 Corrected reticulocyte count. See Reticulocyte count Corrective lenses for astigmatism, I:385–386 bifocal (See Bifocal lenses) contact (See Contact lenses) after eye muscle surgery, II:1269 for eyeglasses, II:1266 for macular degeneration, III:2077 multifocal (See Multifocal lenses) for nystagmus, IV:2372 radial keratotomy and, IV:2803, 2806 trifocal (See Trifocal lenses) for visual impairment, V:3509 from albinism, IV:3078 from Down syndrome, II:1099, 1100 See also Contact lenses; Eyeglasses Corrosive products, activated charcoal and, I:368, II:732 Cortical-basal ganglionic degeneration, III:2222 Cortical cataracts, II:673–675 Corticospinal tract disease, IV:2352 Corticosteroids, II:935–937 for ABPA, I:108 3710 for acne, I:26 for adenovirus infections, I:58 for allergic purpura, I:110 for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:119, 121 for angiomas, I:495, 496 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 for anosmia, I:215 with anticonvulsants, I:255 anxiety from, I:318 for asthma, I:237 with barbiturates, I:447 for Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 for berylliosis, I:472 for bronchitis, I:600 for bursitis, I:621 for canker sores, II:648 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 with cholesterol tests, II:793 for cluster headache, II:825 for coagulation disorders, II:829 for coccyx injuries, II:837 for contact dermatitis, II:909 for COPD, II:811 after corneal transplant, II:920 corneal ulcers from, II:922 with creatinine test, II:950 cryptococcosis with, II:964 Cushing’s syndrome from, I:64–65 with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976 with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 delirium from, II:1021 for dermatitis, II:1038 with dicyclomine, I:309 with diethylcarbamazine, II:1331 with DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for emphysema, II:1173–1174 for encephalitis, II:1179 for eyelid edema, II:1272 for FUO, II:1318 gastric acid determination and, III:1400 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for gout, I:282, III:1477, 1479 with growth hormone tests, III:1487 for Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1493 for heel spurs, III:1562 for hemolytic anemia, I:183, III:1580 for herniated disk, III:1628 with herpetic keratitis, III:1904 with histoplasmosis, III:1640 for hives, III:1642 with HRT, III:1670 immunosuppressive agents and, III:1796, 1799 indigestion from, III:1813 for infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 for keloids, III:1903 for lichen planus, III:1997 for Lyme disease, III:2060 with minoxidil, III:2202 with MMR vaccine, III:2256 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 for myasthenia gravis, III:2273 before nail removal, IV:2309 for optic neuritis, IV:2400 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for pain management, IV:2463 for papilledema, IV:2488 for pericarditis, IV:2539 for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 with prematurity, IV:2708 for proctitis, IV:2719 with protein electrophoresis, IV:2747 psoriatic arthritis and, IV:2759 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 for Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2852 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854–2855 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 for scleroderma, IV:2967 for scrub typhus, IV:2977 for serum sickness, IV:3008 for shingles, IV:3032 for skin lesions, IV:3076 sleep disorders from, IV:3089 sporotrichosis and, IV:3143 strongyloidiasis and, V:3292 for subdural hematoma, IV:3205 for sunburn, IV:3218 for temporal arteritis, V:3248 for thymoma, V:3303 for TMJ, V:3250 for toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3346 for uveitis, V:3462 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3546 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 Corticotropin, II:935, 936, 937 for Addison’s disease, I:54 deficiency of, III:1746, 1747 for gout, III:1477 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 pheochromocytoma and, IV:2577 test, I:64–66, II:937 Corticotropin-releasing hormone, I:65 Corticotropin-releasing hormone test, II:972–973, III:1748 Cortisol. See Hydrocortisone Cortisol test, II:937–938, II:972 Cortisone, II:935 for atopic dermatitis, I:404 for autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 bruises from, I:607 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Mycoplasma infections from, III:2278 in pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 stress urinary incontinence from, III:2123, V:3454 with vocal cord paralysis, V:3530 whooping (See Whooping cough) Cough machines, for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 Cough reflex, II:943 Cough suppressants, II:943–944 for bronchitis, I:599 vs. expectorants, II:1254 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214, 2215 Cough techniques, for muscular dystrophy, III:2263, 2267 Coughing. See Cough Coughing up blood. See Hemoptysis Coumadin. See Warfarin Counseling for abortion, I:8, 12 for AIDS, I:83, 86 for amputation, I:159 for atherosclerosis, I:396 in ayurvedic medicine, I:431 for bad breath, I:437 for battered child syndrome, I:453 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 for child abuse, II:756 for children, II:764 for electric shock injuries, II:1144 for FTT, II:1279 genetic (See Genetic counseling) for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 for hermaphroditism, III:1847 for impulse control disorders, III:1808 for infertility, III:1809, 1832 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 for liver transplantation, III:2029 for mastectomy, III:2130 with obesity surgery, IV:2380 for parents of stillbirth, IV:3163 for pica, IV:2596 with plastic surgery, IV:2622 for postpartum depression, IV:2682 prepregnancy, IV:2712–2713 for rape and sexual assault, IV:2818 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for sickle cell anemia, I:183 for STDs, IV:3022 for substance abuse, IV:3210 for syphilis, IV:3230 Couples therapy, II:1287–1288, III:2122 Covermark, for angiomas, I:496 Cow grass. See Red clover Cows, bovine spongiform encephalopathy in, II:951–952 COX-2. See Cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Coxiella burnetii, IV:2797 Coxsackie B virus. See Coxsackieviruses B Coxsackieviruses hand-foot-mouth disease from, III:1507 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 Keshan disease and, III:2191 sore throat from, IV:3118 TORCH test for, V:3338 Coxsackieviruses B congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 myocarditis from, III:2289 CP. See Cerebral palsy CPAP. See Continuous positive airway pressure ventilation CPAP machine, for snoring, IV:3112 CPAP ventilation. See Continuous positive airway pressure ventilation CPD. See Cephalopelvic disproportion CPM. See Continuous passive motion machines CPR. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation CPR Prompt. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation CR-39, for eyeglass lenses, II:1266 Crab yaws. See Yaws Crabs, fluke infection from, II:1343 Crack cocaine, II:831–832 abuse of, IV:3207 with coronary heart disease, II:933 overdose, II:1104 withdrawal from, V:3572 Cradle cap. See Seborrheic dermatitis Cradleboards, congenital hip dysplasia from, II:892 Cramp bark for allergies, I:121 for amenorrhea, III:2171–2172 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 Cramps menstrual (See Dysmenorrhea) muscle (See Spasm) Cranberry juice for bladder stones, I:511 for cystitis, II:994 for diverticulum and exstrophy, II:889 for urethritis, V:3441 Cranial arteritis. See Temporal arteritis Cranial manipulation. See Craniosacral therapy Cranial nerves acoustic neuroma and, I:27, 28–29 in facial paralysis, I:461 neurologic examination of, IV:2350, 2351–2352 physical examination of, IV:2594 Cranial osteopathy. See Craniosacral therapy 3711 Cranial osteopathy for corns, II:924 for corticotropic hormone deficiency, III:1749 cortisol test with, II:937 for costochondritis, II:940 with cystoscopy, II:996 for deviated septum, II:1045 for erythema multiforme, II:1226 fracture repair and, II:1361 for graft vs. host disease, III:1481 for hermaphroditism, III:1847 for itching, III:1875 leukocytosis from, III:1993 for low back pain, III:2032 for nasal polyps, IV:2316 for nephritis, IV:2334 for Peyronie’s disease, IV:2572 for physical allergy, IV:2592 for polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2666 for rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 for seborrheic dermatitis, IV:2981 for tendinitis, V:3251 for tennis elbow, V:3252 for thyroiditis, V:3319 tracheotomy and, V:3355 Coryanthe yohimbe, for impotence, III:1806 Corynebacterium diphtheriae, II:1077, IV:2321 Cosmetic dentistry, II:939–940 Cosmetic surgery. See Plastic surgery Cosmetics allergic rhinitis from, I:112 for angiomas, I:496 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 for vitiligo, IV:3078, V:3527 Cosopt, for glaucoma, III:1459 Costochondral joints, inflammation of. See Costochondritis Costochondritis, II:940–941 Costs and cost analysis, of autopsy, I:426 Cot death. See Sudden infant death syndrome Cotrel-Dubousset instrumentation. See Spinal instrumentation Cotrim. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole Cotswold System. See Ann Arbor Staging Classification Cotton, lung diseases from, III:2050 Cotton, Nephi, II:945 Cough, II:941–943 for atelectasis, I:390 from calcium channel blockers, II:628 in chest physical therapy, II:745 from croup, II:960 drugs for, II:943–944 with emphysema, II:1173, 1174 from lung diseases, III:2050 Cranial osteopathy Craniopharyngiomas, IV:2607–2608 Craniosacral therapy, II:944–945, IV:2435 Craniosynostosis, IV:2488 Craniotomy, I:572, II:946–948, 947f Cranium, in congenital brain defects, II:890 CRAO. See Retinal artery occlusion Crataegus. See Hawthorn Crayfish, fluke infection from, II:1343 Creams (Topical). See Ointments Creatine kinase, II:948 Creatine kinase test, II:948–949 with alanine aminotransferase test, I:87–88 in alcoholic myopathy, I:93 vs. aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 for muscular dystrophy, III:2265 with troponins test, V:3396 Creating Affluence: Wealth Consciousness in the Field of All Possibilities, I:429 Creatinine in acute kidney failure, I:45 in chronic kidney failure, II:807 in dehydration, II:1017 in E. coli infections, II:1236 in renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 Creatinine test, II:949–950 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202–1203 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for kidney function, III:1912, 1913 parathyroid hormone test with, IV:2495 Creative arts therapy. See Art therapy Creative imagery. See Guided imagery Creative visualization. See Guided imagery Crede maneuver, for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 Creeping eruption. See Cutaneous larva migrans Crepitance, from nasal trauma, IV:2317 Crepitus, from gangrene, III:1394 CREST syndrome. See Scleroderma Cretinism, III:1756 from iodine deficiency, III:2190, 2192, 2193 thyroxine levels and, V:3310 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:950–954 autopsy and, I:426 from blood transfusion, I:526 dementia from, II:1025 encephalitis from, II:1178 hemophilia and, III:1585 CRH. See Corticotropin-releasing hormone Cri du chat syndrome, II:954–956 3712 Crib death. See Sudden infant death syndrome Crick, Francis, III:1432 Cricothyroidotomy, V:3353 Crigler-Najjar syndrome, III:1883 Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever, III:1592 Criminal behavior autopsy for, I:426 with conduct disorder, II:882, 883 Crisis intervention, III:1484 Crit. See Hematocrit Crixivan. See Indinavir Crohn’s disease, II:956–959, IV:3049–3051 from ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 anorectal fistula with, I:210 with antihelminthic drugs, I:275 colon cancer from, II:849 colonoscopy for, II:856 diarrhea from, II:1066 enterostomy for, II:1209 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 vs. IBS, III:1866 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 pernicious anemia from, IV:2558 proctitis from, IV:2719 stool fat test for, IV:3173 vs. ulcerative colitis, V:3429 upper GI series for, V:3438 uveitis from, V:3461 zinc deficiency from, III:2191 Cromolyn. See Cromolyn sodium Cromolyn sodium for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:120–121, 122 for asthma, I:237, 382 for mastocytosis, III:2133 CROS hearing aids, III:1526 Cross dressing. See Transvestism Cross eyed. See Esotropia Cross-gender identity disorder. See Gender identity disorder Cross infection, III:1674–1676 with antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 enterobacterial infections from, II:1205 enteroviruses and, II:1212 FUO and, II:1317 Haemeophilus influenzae pneumonia as, III:1586 infection control for, III:1821–1823 Legionnaires’ disease from, III:1973 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 patient isolation and, III:1872–1873 with pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2633 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2635 with pseudomonas infections, IV:2750 septic shock from, IV:3005 with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, IV:3160 with staphylococcus, IV:3156, 3157, 3159 TB tests and, V:3402 from wound flushing, V:3580 Crossbite. See Malocclusion Crossed eyes. See Esotropia Crossmatching. See Blood typing Croup, II:959–961 cough from, II:941 with measles, III:2139 with stridor, IV:3193 Crowds, RSV and, IV:2869 Crowns (Dental), V:3334 for dental caries, V:3330 for dental trauma, II:1029–1030 for root canal therapy, IV:2915, 2916 CRP. See C-reactive protein CRRT. See Hemodialysis CRS. See Congenital rubella syndrome Cruelty, in conduct disorder, II:882, 883 Cruex. See Undecylinic acid Crush injuries with alcoholic myopathy, I:93 from animal bites, I:206, 498, 499 botulism from, I:560 to fingertips, II:1332, 1333 flushing of, V:3580 recompression treatment for, IV:2826 Crust. See Scabs Crusted scabies. See Scabies Cryoablation, for liver cancer, III:2021 Cryoglobulin, III:1776 Cryoglobulin test, II:961–962 Cryoglobulinemia Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 from hepatitis C, III:1604 from multiple myeloma, III:2240 Cryopexy, for detached retina, IV:2877 Cryoprecipitated AHF for coagulation disorders, II:828–829 from plasma, I:525, 526 Cryosurgery for angiomas, I:495 for cervical cancer, II:713 with colposcopy, II:865 for non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3067 for prostate cancer, IV:2733, 2738 for skin lesion removal, IV:3073 for warts, V:3549 See also Cryotherapy Cryotherapy, II:962–964 for cervical cancer, IV:2487 for cervicitis, II:723 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for Bartholin’s gland cysts, I:450 blood (See Blood culture) for enteroviruses, II:1213 fungal (See Fungal culture) for herpesviridae, V:3424 for inclusion conjunctivitis, III:1811 for lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1938 for Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2851 for rubella, IV:2927 for skin lesions, IV:3076 for somatitis, IV:3170 for travelers diarrhea, V:3379 for vulvovaginitis, V:3540 for wounds, V:3578–3580 Cultures (Civilization) vs. learning disorders, III:1969 pica and, IV:2595–2596 piercing and tatoos in, IV:2598–2599 in somatoform disorders, IV:3115 Cumin, for anemia, I:184 Cumulative trauma disorders. See Repetition strain injury Cunningham clamp, for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 Cupping, acupuncture and, I:17, 41 Cuprimine. See Penicillamine Curative cancer therapy. See Definitive cancer therapy Curcuma domestica. See Turmeric Curcuma longa. See Turmeric Curettage for cerumen impaction, II:710 dilatation and (See Dilatation and curettage) for non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3067 for skin lesion removal, IV:3073 Cushing’s syndrome, II:970–974, 971 from adrenocorticol carcinoma, I:60 amenorrhea from, III:2169 anxiety from, I:318 corticotropin test for, I:64–65 cortisol test for, II:937 due to glucocorticoids, II:936 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154, 1155 hypokalemia from, III:1740 obesity from, IV:2374 urinalysis for, V:3446 Custodial care, for pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2569 Custody, child, III:2122 Cutaneous anthrax, I:224 Cutaneous diphtheria, II:1077 Cutaneous larva migrans, II:974, 974–975, III:1667, 1875 Cutaneous leishmaniasis, III:1975 Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:975–977 Cutaneous ureterostomy, V:3452 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Cutis laxa, II:978–979 Cutis marmorata, II:1009 Cuts. See Wounds CV205-502, IV:2608 CVA. See Stroke CVS. See Chorionic villi sampling CX32 gene, II:734 Cy A. See Cyclosporine Cyanide lung diseases from, III:2050 movement disorders from, III:2221 poisoning, IV:2643 histotoxic anoxia from, I:216 from smoke inhalation, IV:3102 Cyanosis, II:979–980 from atelectasis, I:390 from congenital heart disease, II:900, 901 from metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 from methemoglobinemia, III:2184 from near drowning, IV:2327 from overhydration, IV:2449 from pleurisy, IV:2631 with pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 with tetralogy of Fallot, V:3269 Cyanotic defects, II:900–901 Cyclamen, poisoning from, IV:2643 Cycle specific antineoplastic drugs, I:246 Cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinases, III:1467 Cyclic neutropenia. See Neutropenia Cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:980–981 Cyclizine for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for motion sickness, III:2219 Cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 in rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Cyclobenzaprine for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 as muscle relaxant, III:2259 with opioid analgesics, I:178 Cyclophosphamide antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 for aplastic anemia, I:337 for Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 for cancer, II:740 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 hemorrhagic cystitis from, II:992 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1799 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 kidney damage from, IV:2337 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2336 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2855 3713 Cyclophosphamide for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for epididymitis, II:1219 after episiotomy, II:1222 for erysipelas, II:1226 for eye cancer, II:1261 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for low back pain, III:2032 for papillomavirus, IV:2542 for retinoblastoma, IV:2886 for skin lesions, IV:3076 See also Cooling treatments Cryptococcal meningitis, I:76, II:964–966 Cryptococcomas, II:965 Cryptococcoses. See Cryptococcosis Cryptococcosis, II:964–966 Addison’s disease from, I:53 cough from, II:941 Cryptococcus neoformans, II:964 Cryptophthalmos syndrome. See Fraser’s syndrome Cryptorchidism. See Undescended testes Cryptosporidiosis, I:76, II:967–968 Cryptosporidium, II:967, V:3379 Crystal meth. See Methamphetamine Crystalline lens in cataracts, II:673–675 in glaucoma, III:1457–1458 in presbyopia, IV:2713 slit lamp examination for, II:1263 Crystodigin. See Digitoxin Cs A. See Cyclosporine CSA. See Central sleep apnea CSF. See Cerebrospinal fluid CSPC. See U.S. Consumer Safety Products Commission CT angiography. See Computed tomography angiography CT scan. See Computed tomography scan CTCL. See Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma CTFR gene, gene therapy and, III:1421 CTnT test. See Troponin test Culdocentesis, for ectopic pregnancy, II:1132 Culex, elephantiasis from, II:1166 Cullen’s sign, IV:2479 Culpeper, Nicholas, III:1617 Culpocentesis, for abdominal fluid, IV:2490 Cultural bias, II:969–970 Cultural issues, in gay and lesbian health, III:1415 Culture-fair test, II:969–970 Culture tests (Biological) bacterial (See Bacterial culture) Cyclophosphamide for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, IV:2901 for small cell lung cancer, III:2049 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for testicular cancer, V:3258 for vasculitis, V:3480 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 Cyclopia, from holoprosencephaly, II:890 Cycloplegic exam. See Ocular refraction test Cyclosarin. See Nerve gas Cycloserine for mycobacterial infections, III:2277 for tuberculosis, I:310, 311, 312–313 Cyclospora cyclosporiasis from, II:981 travelers diarrhea from, V:3379 Cyclosporiasis, II:981–983 Cyclosporin. See Cyclosporine Cyclosporine for aplastic anemia, I:337 for Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 with diuretics, II:1090 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for graft vs. host disease, III:1482 with grapefruit juice, II:1102 in immunosuppressive therapy, III:1796, 1798 kidney damage from, IV:2337 for kidney transplantation, III:1921 for liver transplantation, III:2029 for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2336 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 for polymyositis, IV:2667 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2855 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 Cyclothymia, in bipolar disorder, I:486 Cyclotron radiosurgery. See Radiosurgery CYP1A2. See Cytochrome P-450 CYP2C9. See Cytochrome P-450 CYP2C19. See Cytochrome P-450 CYP2D6. See Cytochrome P-450 CYP2D6 gene, IV:2574 CYP3A4. See Cytochrome P-450 Cypress, for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 Cyproheptadine for allergies, I:278 3714 for cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:981 Cyproterone acetate, for paraphilias, IV:3019 Cysteamine, II:1291 Cystectomy, II:983–984 for bladder cancer, I:508 for ovarian cysts, IV:2446 Cysteine in mineral deficiencies, III:2190 sulfur from, III:2196 Cystic fibrosis, II:984–990, 985 2,3-DPG test for, V:3420 ABPA from, I:108 amylase tests for, I:160 bronchiectasis from, I:596 carrier testing for, III:1436 chest physical therapy for, II:745 in children, II:762 cor pulmonale from, II:917 cough from, II:941 CVS for, II:801 gene therapy for, III:1419, 1421 with malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 oxygen therapy for, III:1838 with penicillins, IV:2528 pneumothorax from, IV:2641 rectal prolapse and, IV:2835 stool fat test for, IV:3173 surgery for, III:2053 vitamin A deficiency from, V:3512 vitamin E deficiency from, V:3518 vitamin K deficiency from, V:3519 wheezing from, V:3554 Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator gene. See CTFR gene Cystic kidney intravenous urography for, III:1855 oligohydramnios from, IV:2664 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 Cystic mastitis. See Fibrocystic condition of the breast Cysticerosis, V:3239–3240, 3241 Cystine, in kidney stones, II:990, III:1917 Cystinosis, II:1290, 1291 Cystinuria, II:990–991, V:3446 Cystitis, II:991–994 from congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 cystometry for, II:994, 995 female sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 hemorrhagic (See Hemorrhagic cystitis) pyelonephritis and, IV:2789 See also Urinary tract infections Cystocele, from pelvic relaxation, IV:2524 Cystoid macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration Cystoid macular edema, III:2075 Cystometry, II:994–995, IV:2347 Cystoscopy, II:995–998, 996–997f for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 for bladder cancer, I:508 for cervical cancer, II:713 for congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 for diverticulum and exstrophy, II:889 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2347 for prostatitis, IV:2740 after transurethral bladder resection, V:3375 for ureteral stents, V:3439 Cystospaz. See Hyoscyamine Cystourethrography, II:993 Cystourethroscopy. See Cystoscopy Cysts Bartholin’s gland (See Bartholin’s gland cyst) breast (See Fibrocystic condition of the breast) CAT scan for, II:877 of cryptosporidia, II:967 from cyclosporiasis, II:981, 982 from echinococcosis, II:1127 vs. goiter, III:1470 kidney (See Cystic kidney) lung (See Lung cysts) nodule from, IV:3075 ocular, III:2185 oocysts (See Oocysts) ovarian (See Ovarian cysts) rupture of, II:1127, 1128 synovial (See Ganglion) thyroid ultrasound for, V:3316 from toxoplasmosis, V:3348 ultrasonography for, IV:2525, 2527 Cytarabine, IV:2720 Cytochrome P-450, II:1102 Cytokine inhibitor genes, I:424–425 Cytokines for autoimmune diseases, I:424–425 in histiocytosis, III:1638–1639 with KS-associated herpesvirus, III:1898 T lymphocytes and, III:2092 Cytology nasal (See Nasal cytology) sputum (See Sputum culture) Cytomegalovirus with AIDS, I:77 antiviral drugs for, I:315–316 beta2-microglobulin test for, I:473 birth defects from, I:491 from blood transfusion, I:526 congenital brain defects from, II:891 encephalitis from, II:1178 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 with graft vs. host disease, III:1482 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 D D & C. See Dilatation and curettage D & E. See Vacuum curettage D & X. See Abortion, partial birth D-penicillamine for copper toxicity, III:2194 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 d4T. See Stavudine da Vinci, Leonardo, as vegetarian, V:3485 Dacarbazine for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646 for melanoma, III:2099 in MOPP/ABVC chemotherapy, III:1646 Daclizumab for immunosuppression, III:1796 for kidney transplantation, III:1922 Dacron in atrial septal defect surgery, I:410 in heart surgery, III:1544 Dacryocystitis, II:1003–1004 Dacryocystography, II:1003 Dacryocystorhinostomy, II:1004 Dacryostenosis, II:1003 Daffodil poisoning, IV:2643, 2644 Daily activities. See Activities of daily living Daily wear lenses. See Contact lenses Dairy products drug interactions with, II:1102 with food poisoning, II:1355 lactose intolerance and, III:1945–1946 with tetracyclines, V:3266 Dalcaine. See Lidocaine Dalmane. See Flurazepam Dalton, Christine B., III:1866–1867 Dalton’s Law of partial pressures, IV:2356 Damus-Kaye-Stansel procedure, II:902, III:1543 DAN. See Divers Alert Network Dan shen. See Sage Danazol cortisol test with, II:937 for endometriosis, II:1194 Dance therapy, III:2226–2227 for anxiety, I:321 for anxiety disorders, I:324 for stress, IV:3186 for stress reduction, IV:3189 Dancers, with oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 Dandelion for anemia, I:184 for ascites, I:373 for canker sores, II:648 for constipation, II:907 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for weight loss, IV:2377 Dander allergic rhinitis from, I:112 allergy tests for, I:123 asthma from, I:236, 380, III:2050 occupational asthma from, IV:2386 Dandruff blepharitis and, II:1273 vs. lice, III:1995 seborrheic dermatitis and, IV:2980 Dandy-Walker syndrome, II:890, 891 Dane particle. See Hepatitis B virus Dang gui. See Dong quai Danocrine. See Danazol Danthron, as laxative, III:1964 Dantrium. See Dantrolene Dantrolene for cerebral palsy, II:706 as muscle relaxant, III:2258–2260 Dapsone for AIDS, I:80 G6PD and, III:1465 for pneumocystis pneumonia prevention, IV:2637 with refampin and clofazimine, for leprosy, III:1979 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2855 for spider bite necrosis, I:501 for toxoplasmosis, V:3350 Daraprim. See Primaquine Darling’s disease. See Histoplasmosis Darvocet. See Propoxyphene Darvocet N. See Propoxyphene-acetaminophen Darvon. See Propoxyphene Datril. See Acetaminophen Datura stramonium. See Jimsonweed DaunoXone. See Liposomal daunorubicin DAWN. See Drug Abuse Warning Network Daydreaming, directed. See Guided imagery Daypro. See Oxaprozin DCS. See Decompression sickness DDAVP. See Desmopressin acetate ddC. See Zalcitabine ddI. See Didanosine DDIS. See Dissociative Disorders Interview Schedule DDNOS. See Dissociative disorders DDP. See Cisplatin DDT for lice, III:1995 for malaria prevention, III:2091 De Magnete, III:2080 De Solye, Hans, III:1424–1425 Dead man’s bells. See Foxglove Deadly nightshade. See Belladonna Deafness from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 cochlear implants for, II:837–839 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 hallucinations from, III:1504 from hemorrhagic fevers, III:1592 with Jervell and Lange-Neilsen syndrome, IV:2724 from Krabbe’s disease, III:2004 from Meniere’s disease, III:2152 from meningitis, III:2156 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 from nephritis, IV:2334 from osteosclerosis, IV:3156 from perinatal infection, IV:2541 from tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3395 1-Deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin. See Desmopressin acetate Death, II:1004–1007 from adrenal crisis, II:885 from cancer, III:1415 from cesarean section, II:726 from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:950 3715 Death Guillain-Barré syndrome from, III:1492 vs. LCM, III:2069 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 TORCH test for, V:3338 Cytomegalovirus antibody screening test, II:998–999, IV:2541 Cytomegalovirus infections, II:999–1001 cerebral palsy from, II:702 Guillain-Barré syndrome from, IV:2549 with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897–1898 after kidney transplantation, III:1922 with liver transplantation, III:2030 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 maternal, mental retardation from, III:2174 perinatal, IV:2540–2543 uveitis from, V:3461 Cytoreductive surgery. See Debulking Cytosar. See Cytarabine Cytoscopy for hydronephrosis, III:1689 for prostate biopsy, IV:2727–2728 Cytotec. See Misoprostol Cytotoxic drugs for liver cancer, III:2021 for nephritis, IV:2334 Cytovene. See Ganciclovir Cytoxan. See Cyclophosphamide Death from decompression sickness, II:1009 from drug overdose, II:1104, 1105, 1106 from electrolyte disorders, II:1156 from embolism, II:1169 from emphysema, II:1172 from female genital mutilation, II:1307 fetal (See Fetal death) from flesh-eating disease, II:1336, 1337 from food poisoning, II:1355, 1356 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1370 from hantaviruses, III:1509 from intussusception, III:1856 from lead poisoning, III:1965 leading causes in adolescents, II:766t leading causes in elderly, IV:3001t from liver cirrhosis, II:815 miscarriage as, III:2204, 2205 mood disorders from, III:2216 from osteopetroses, IV:2424 from ovarian cancer, IV:2439 from pancreatitis, IV:2481 from paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 of parent, PTSD from, IV:2685 from pellagra, IV:2516 from placental abruption, IV:2613 from poisoning, IV:2643 from radiation injuries, IV:2809 from Reye’s syndrome, IV:2895 from RSV, IV:2869 from SCID, IV:3010 from septic shock, IV:3005 from serum sickness, IV:3008 from shock, IV:3033 from smallpox, IV:3096, 3097 from STDs, IV:3020 from substance withdrawal, V:3572 vs. sudden cardiac death, IV:3212 from T & A, V:3326 from thrombocytosis, V:3297 from toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3345 vitamin K and, V:3519, 3523 XLA and, V:3586 Debenzapine derivatives, I:300 Debridement, II:1007–1008 for animal bites, I:500, 501 for burns, I:618 for clenched fist injury, II:821 for corns, II:924 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for gangrene, III:1395 for human bite infections, III:1678 nail, for onychomycosis, IV:2391 with nasal irrigation, IV:2312 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 for toxic shock syndrome, V:3347 for wound repair, III:1937 Debrox, for cerumen impaction, II:710 3716 Debulking as palliative surgery, II:641 for tumor removal, I:572, II:635, 639, V:3415, 3417 Decadron. See Dexamethasone Decalcification, from vitamin D deficiency, V:3515 Decibels, in hearing loss, I:415 Declomycin. See Demeclocycline Decompensated cirrhosis. See Liver cirrhosis Decompression sickness, II:1008–1010 hyperbaric oxygen therapy for, III:1837, 1839, 1841 recompression treatment for, IV:2826 Decompression surgery. See Surgical decompression Deconamine. See Chlorpheniramine Decongestants, II:1010–1013 for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:119, 121 anosmia and, I:215, IV:3099, 3100 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 arrhythmias from, I:353 with benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1203 for common cold, II:870–871 for deviated septum, II:1045 with fibromyalgia, II:1327 with hydroxyzine, I:285 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 for middle ear, I:427 as migraine trigger, III:2188 for nasal polyps, IV:2316 for otitis media, IV:2435 for otitis media with effusion, III:2304 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for sinusitis, IV:3058 for sleep apnea, IV:3085 for snoring, IV:3113 with vasodilators, V:3484 with ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 Decontamination. See Disinfection Decortication, for empyema, II:1177 Decubitus ulcer, I:456–459, 457 bacteremia from, I:436 debridement for, II:1007 after disk removal, II:1082 flushing of, V:3580 from immobilization, III:1782 multiple sclerosis with, III:2253 skin grafts for, IV:3069 with spinal cord injuries, IV:3129, 3131 from traction, V:3358 Deep breathing exercises. See Breathing exercises Deep fascia. See Fascia Deep meditation. See Meditation Deep muscle training. See Aston patterning Deep tissue manipulation. See Rolfing Deep tissue massage. See Hellerwork; Massage; Rolfing Deep vein thrombosis. See Thrombophlebitis Deer ticks. See Ticks DEET for filariasis prevention, II:1331 for malaria prevention, III:2091 Defense mechanisms, I:319–320 Deferoxamine for iron toxicity, III:2195 for thalassemia, III:1578 Defervescence, from paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 Defibrillation, II:1015–1016 for arrhythmias, I:353 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:408 with CPR, II:662 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1165 for heart attacks, III:1533 with heart transplantation, III:1547 implanted (See Implantable defibrillators) in life support, III:2000 for paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, IV:2505 for prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2725 for sudden cardiac death, IV:3212 for ventricular fibrillation, V:3500 for ventricular tachycardia, V:3504 See also Cardioversion Definitive cancer therapy, II:638–641 Deflazacort, for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 Degenerative disk disease. See Cervical disk disease Degenerative joint disease. See Osteoarthritis Degenerative myopia. See Myopia Degenerative scoliosis, IV:2971 See also Scoliosis Deglutition disorders from achalasia, I:20 from acoustic neuroma, I:29 from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 with benzodiazepines, I:467 from Chagas’ disease, II:728 from diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1071 from dry mouth, II:1109 from dyspepsia, II:1118 EGD for, II:1246 enteral nutrition for, V:3400 esophageal cancer and, II:1240, 1241 with esophageal diverticulum, II:1244 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 gout from, III:1478 from heat stress disorders, III:1556 with hematocrit test, III:1572 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 hypernatremia from, III:1710 from hypokalemia, III:1739 from infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 IV fluids for, III:1853 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1880 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 from measles, III:2140 mineral deficiencies from, III:2190–2191 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 from mushroom poisoning, III:2268 in nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 renal vein thrombosis and, IV:2859 from rotaviruses, IV:2922 shock and, IV:3034, 3035 from staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, IV:3160 from travelers diarrhea, V:3379 from ulcerative colitis, V:3429 urinalysis for, V:3445 from vomiting, IV:2326 from whooping cough, V:3559 from yellow fever, V:3591 Dehydroemetine, for amebiasis, I:145 Dejerine-Sottas disease. See CharcotMarie-Tooth disease Delavirdine, for AIDS, I:80, IV:2359 Delayed growth. See Growth disorders Delayed hypersensitivity reactions. See Allergy Delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1019–1020 Delayed puberty, IV:2773 amenorrhea from, I:146 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 growth hormone tests for, III:1488 from pituitary tumors, IV:2607 Delirium, II:1020–1022 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:137 with anesthesia, I:186 vs. dementia, II:1025 from Hartnup disease, III:1511 Delirium tremens. See Alcohol withdrawal delirium Delivery, II:756 with episiotomy, II:1221 with local anesthesia, I:191 opioid analgesics for, I:175 See also Childbirth; Labor Delta brain wave, II:1152 Delta F508 defect, II:984 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Delta hepatitis. See Hepatitis D Delta sleep. See Non-REM sleep Deltasone. See Prednisone; Prednisone Delusional disorder with paranoia, IV:2493 with psychosis, IV:2765 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 Delusions, II:1022–1024 with delirium, II:1020 from dementia, II:1025 with psychosis, IV:2765 with schizoaffective disorder, IV:2956 from schizophrenia, IV:2959 Demecarium, for glaucoma, II:794 Demeclocycline, I:240, 242 Dementia, II:1024–1027 from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:163 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:694, 696 from concussion, II:879 from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:950, 953 vs. delirium, II:1021 in delusions, II:1022 with Down syndrome, II:1099 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 hallucinations from, III:1504 from hydrocephalus, V:3503 mental status examination for, III:2176 Mini-Mental State Examination for, III:2113 neurologic examination for, IV:2350 with paranoia, IV:2493 from Parkinson disease, IV:2501 senior’s health and, IV:2997–2998, 3000 from subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3200 See also Alzheimer’s disease Dementia pugilistica. See Dementia Demerol. See Meperidine Demineralization, IV:2840 Demulcents, for cough, II:942 Demulen. See Oral contraceptives Demyelinating diseases chronic inflammatory polyneuropathy, IV:2550 vs. facial paralysis, I:461, 462 in Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 in multiple sclerosis, III:2250 paralysis from, IV:2491–2492 See also Adrenoleukodystrophy Demyelination. See Demyelinating diseases Denavir. See Penciclovir Dendritic keratitis, III:1904 Denervation electromyography for, II:1160 3717 Denervation esophageal test for, II:1242 from fluoroquinolones, II:1345 from food poisoning, II:1355 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 gastrostomy for, III:1410 from goiter, III:1470 from head and neck cancer, III:1517 from Krabbe’s disease, III:2004 with laryngitis, III:1957 with lower esophageal ring, I:203, III:2035 from mastoidectomy, III:2134 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 nausea with, IV:2324 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 T & A for, V:3325 from Tay-Sachs disease, III:2004 thyroidectomy for, V:3317 tracheotomy for, V:3352–3353 upper GI series for, V:3438 from vocal cord paralysis, V:3530 Deglycyrrhizinated licorice for hiatal hernias, III:1624 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 Dehydration, II:1017–1019 acute kidney failure from, I:44 from Addison’s disease, I:54 from adrenal crisis, II:885 with aging, I:69 from antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 antidiuretic hormone test for, I:266 from ARDS, I:68 from Atkins diet, I:402 from campylobacteriosis, II:630 from chickenpox, II:750 circulation and, III:1999 from cryptosporidiosis, II:967 from cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:980 from cyclosporiasis, II:982 cystitis from, II:992 decompression sickness and, II:1009 delirium from, II:1021 from dengue fever, II:1028 from diabetes insipidus, II:1047 from diarrhea, I:265, II:1066 dry mouth from, II:1109 from E. coli infections, II:1237 from electrolyte disorders, II:1153, 1154, 1155 from empyema, II:1176 from enterobacterial infections, II:1205 with enterostomies, II:1211 from escherichia coli, III:1581 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 from food poisoning, II:1354, 1355, 1356 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 from gastroenteritis, III:1410 from gingivostomatitis, II:845 Denervation for torticollis, V:3341 Dengue fever, II:1027–1029, III:1590, 1591 Dengue hemorrhagic fever-dengue shock syndrome. See Dengue fever Dengue triad. See Dengue fever Denial (Psychology) of anorexia nervosa, I:212 with substance abuse, IV:3209–3210 substance abuse and, IV:3208, 3209–3210 Denny-Brown’s syndrome, IV:2365 Dental abscess. See Periodontal abscess Dental amalgam, V:3334 Dental anesthetics, I:190, 192 Dental bridges, V:3335 Dental care. See Oral hygiene Dental caries, V:3329–3332, 3330f from anorexia nervosa, I:212 from cutis laxa, II:978 from dry mouth, II:1109, 1110 fluoride for, IV:2405 neuralgia from, IV:2339 prevention of, IV:2405 root canal therapy for, IV:2915 from Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3063, 3064 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 tooth extraction for, V:3332 tooth restoration for, V:3334 toothache and, V:3336 Dental cavities. See Dental caries Dental cleaning. See Oral hygiene Dental crowns. See Crowns (Dental) Dental decay. See Dental caries Dental examination for dental caries, V:3329 for periodontal diseases, IV:2547 prepregnancy, IV:2712–2713 for TMJ, V:3249 for toothache, V:3336–3337 for toothache prevention, V:3338 Dental fillings, IV:2405, 2406, V:3334 for dental caries, V:3330 for dental trauma, II:1029 removal of, for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:166 toothache and, V:3337 Dental floss. See Flossing Dental fractures, IV:2318 Dental hygiene. See Oral hygiene Dental implants, II:939, V:3335 Dental infections, IV:2407 Dental inlays, V:3334 Dental materials lichen planus from, III:1997 stomatitis and, IV:3170 Dental pins, with jaw fixation, III:1885 Dental plaque, IV:2405–2406 dental caries and, V:3329 3718 periodontal diseases from, IV:2546–2548 Dental procedures cultures for, V:3578 local anesthesia for, I:190 for periodontal diseases, IV:2548 Dental prosthesis care of, IV:2405 local anesthesia for, I:190 with nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 for periodontal diseases, IV:2548 in root canal therapy, IV:2915, 2916 for sleep apnea, IV:3092 Dental restoration, V:3332, V:3334–3336 Dental surgery. See Oral surgery Dental trauma, II:1029–1031, III:2137 Dental x-rays for impacted tooth, III:1799 for periodontal diseases, IV:2548 for TMJ, V:3249 for tooth extraction, V:3333 for toothache, V:3337 Dentistry, cosmetic. See Cosmetic dentistry Dentures, V:3335 bad breath from, I:437 local anesthesia for, I:190 in root canal therapy, IV:2915, 2916 Denys-Drash syndrome, V:3564 Deoxycofomycin, II:977 Deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA Depakene. See Valproic acid Depakote. See Divalproex Department of Agriculture. See U.S. Department of Agriculture Department of Defense. See U.S. Department of Agriculture Depen. See Penicillamine Dependency (Physiology). See Substance abuse Dependent personality disorder, IV:2564–2567 Depersonalization, III:2245 with dissociative disorders, II:1086, 1087 from dissociative identity disorder, III:2245 See also Dissociative disorders Depersonalization disorder with dissociative disorders, II:1086, 1087 Depigmentation, for vitiligo, V:3527 Depilatories, for hirsutism, III:1637 Depo-Provera, II:1031–1032 for amenorrhea, III:2171 for contraception, II:911 for endometriosis, II:1194 HRT and, III:1669 for Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597 Depression from Addison’s disease, I:54 aging and, I:69 Alexander technique for, I:103 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:137, 139 amenorrhea from, I:146 vs. anorexia nervosa, I:213 with anti-insomnia agents, I:284 antidepressants for, I:256 antimalarials and, I:286 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311, 312 anxiety disorder and, I:323, 324, III:1428 aromatherapy for, I:349 with barbiturates, I:446 with bed-wetting, I:455 with benzodiazepines, I:467 with beta blockers, I:476 bilateral cingulotomy for, IV:2770 biofeedback for, I:482 with bipolar disorder, I:486 from brucellosis, I:606 calcium channel blockers with, II:628 in cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 in caregivers, II:1026 catatonia with, II:676 from celiac disease, II:682 in children, II:762 with chronic fatigue syndrome, II:803–804 from chronic pain, IV:2460 with conduct disorder, II:883 constipation from, II:906 after coronary artery bypass grafting, II:928 with decongestants, II:1012 from dementia, II:1025 vs. dementia, II:1026 Depo-Provera with, II:1031 from digitalis, II:1074 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2245–2246 with drug overdose, II:1104, 1106 electroconvulsive therapy for, II:1149 from enterostomies, II:1211 erection disorders from, IV:3051 exercise for, II:1249 female sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 with fibromyalgia, II:1326 in gays and lesbians, III:1415, 1416 group therapy for, III:1485 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 Holtzman inkblot test for, III:1655 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 from hypocalcemia, II:1158 hypochondriasis from, III:1733 from hypoglycemia, III:1735 with infertility drugs, III:1831 insomnia from, III:1843 from Klinefelter syndrome, III:1927 vs. learning disorders, III:1969 with mania, III:2113 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 DeQuervain’s thyroiditis. See Subacute thyroiditis Derealization. See Depersonalization disorder Dermablend, for angiomas, I:496 Dermabrasion. See Skin resurfacing Dermal moles. See Nevus Dermatitis, II:1036–1039 atopic (See Atopic dermatitis) contact (See Contact dermatitis) from diaper rash, II:1062 folliculitis with, II:1351 lichenification from, IV:3075 vs. Paget’s disease of the breast, IV:2457–2458 seborrheic (See Seborrheic dermatitis) skin biopsy for, IV:3065 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 Dermatitis herpetiformis, III:1874 Dermatitis,contact. See Contact dermatitis Dermatographism, IV:2592 Dermatologic agents congenital heart diseases from, II:900 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 Dermatomycoses, I:270 Dermatomyositis, I:422, 423, III:2295, IV:2666–2667 Dermatophytes tests for, III:1929 tinea and, IV:2908 Dermatosparaxis Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, II:1139 Dermis, in flesh-eating disease, II:1336 Dermoid cysts, IV:2445 DES. See Diethylstilbestrol; Dissociative Experiences Scale DES daughters, II:1039–1040 Descending colon. See Colon Desenex. See Undecylinic acid Desensitization for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for nasal polyps, IV:2316 for neuralgia, IV:2340 for paraphilias, IV:3019 for phobias, I:73, IV:2582–2583 Desert fever. See Coccidioidomycosis Desert herb. See Ephedra Desferoxamine, for sickle cell disease, IV:3046 Desfluorane, for general anesthesia, I:186 Desipramine for ADHD, I:412 with anticonvulsants, I:254, 255 with decongestants, II:1012 for depression, I:258 overdose, II:1104 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Deslorelin, for precocious puberty, IV:2691 Desmethyldiazepam, I:231 Desmoid tumors, II:1287 Desmopressin for coagulation disorders, II:829 for platelet function disorders, IV:2626 Desmopressin acetate for bed-wetting, I:455 for diabetes insipidus, II:1047 von Willebrand disease and, V:3533–3534 Desogen. See Oral contraceptives Desquamative gingivitis, IV:2546 Desquamative interstitial pneumonitis. See interstitial lung diseases Desyrel. See Trazodone Detached retina. See Retinal detachment Detergents dermatitis from, II:1037 for enemas, II:1200 extrinsic allergic alveolitis from, III:1717 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234 nail removal for, IV:2309 Detoxification therapy, II:1041–1044, II:1043 for alcoholism, I:97–98 in ayurvedic medicine, I:428, 431 for brain tumors, I:573 diets, II:1042 methadone in, III:2181–2183 for multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 for psoriasis, IV:2758 for substance abuse, IV:3210, V:3573–3574 Detrusor, urine flow test for, V:3457 Deuteranopia, II:859 Developmental apraxia, IV:3122–3124 Developmental delays, II:764, 765 bed-wetting from, I:454 from child abuse, II:754–755 with Down syndrome, II:1099 from fragile X syndrome, II:1368 from hookworm disease, III:1668 from mental retardation, III:2172–2173 MRI for, III:2082 from necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 from peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 pica from, IV:2595 Stanford-Binet intelligence scale for, IV:3153 Developmental disorders in children, II:762–764, 765 vs. mutism, III:2272 3719 Developmental disorders MAO inhibitors for, III:2213 in men, III:2168 from menopause, III:2160 from miscarriage, III:2205 in mood disorders, III:2216–2217 from multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 from multiple sclerosis, III:2251 from narcolepsy, IV:2312 from niacin deficiency, V:3525 with obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2381 from opioid analgesics, I:178 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 with paranoia, IV:2493 parental, child abuse from, II:754 PET scan for, IV:2677 from PMS, IV:2710 from postconcussion syndrome, III:1521 from psoriasis, IV:2758 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 after rape, IV:2818 after salpingo-oophorectomy, IV:2939 with schizoaffective disorder, IV:2956–2957 with seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for, IV:2990–2993 with self mutilation, IV:2993, 2994 senior’s health and, IV:2996, 2997, 3000, 3001 from sexual dysfunctions, IV:3016 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 smelling disorders with, IV:3099 with somatoform disorders, IV:3116 from steroids, III:1774 from stroke, IV:3197 substance abuse and, IV:3207–3208 with testosterone replacement therapy, III:2162 from Tourette syndrome, V:3341, 3342, 3343 tricyclic antidepressants for, I:258 from urinary incontinence, V:3455 from whiplash, V:3555 from Wilson disease, V:3567 in women, V:3577 Depressive disorders, II:1032–1036, 1033t, 1034 with bipolar disorder, I:486 conduct disorder from, II:883 with delusions, II:1022 major (See Major depressive disorder) as mood disorder, III:2216–2217 oppositional defiant disorder from, IV:2396 See also Depression Depth perception with contact lenses, II:1267 vision training for, V:3508 Denervation neuropsychological tests for, IV:2764 polydactyly and syndactyly from, IV:2661 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 TEF as, V:3352 Developmental hip dysplasia. See Congenital hip dysplasia Developmental milestones, II:764 Deviated septum, II:1044–1046, IV:3099 Devil’s cherries. See Belladonna Devil’s claw for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 Devil’s flight. See St. John’s wort Devil’s herb. See Belladonna Devil’s shoestring. See Plantain DEXA. See Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry DEXA scan. See Bone density scan Dexamethasone, II:935 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885, 886 for croup, II:960 for encephalitis, II:1179 for high altitude cerebral edema, I:134 for hirsutism, III:1637 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 for PCOS, IV:2655 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 Dexamethasone suppression test, II:972 Dexchlorpheniramine, for allergies, I:278 Dexfenfluramine hydrochloride, IV:2376 Dexone. See Dexamethasone Dextran immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1789 platelet aggregation test and, IV:2623 Dextroamphetamine for ADHD, I:412 for narcolepsy, IV:3091 Dextroamphetamine sulfate, II:691 Dextrocardia, from situs inversus, IV:3060 Dextromethorphan, for coughs, II:942, 943 Dey-Dose. See Metaproterenol DHA. See Docosahexanoic acid DHEA, aging and, I:71 Di-Gel. See Simethicone Di-Spaz. See Dicyclomine DiaBeta. See Glyburide Diabetes with ACE inhibitors, I:204 with acidosis, III:2179–2180 3720 aging and, I:69 amylase tests for, I:160 with anticonvulsants, I:254 antihistamines and, I:278 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311, 313 astigmatism from, I:385 atherosclerosis from, I:393, 394 Atkins diet and, I:402 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 balanitis and, I:439 with bed-wetting, I:454 with beta blockers, I:476 with breast reconstruction, I:586 with bunions, I:615 with bursitis, I:620 carbuncle with, I:536 with cardiovascular diseases, III:2200 carpal tunnel syndrome and, II:667 carpal tunnel syndrome with, II:667 cesarean section with, II:759 chemonucleolysis and, II:739 chemotherapy with, II:740 with cholesterol tests, II:792 with congenital heart disease, II:902 constipation from, II:906 with corneal ulcers, II:922 with corns and calluses, II:924 with cryotherapy, II:962 with debridement, II:1007 with decongestants, II:1011 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 dehydration from, II:1017 detached retina and, IV:2878 diarrhea from, II:1066 with diuretics, II:1089 dizziness from, II:1095 with Down syndrome, II:1099 drugs for, I:261–263 dry mouth from, II:1109 with endarterectomy, II:1180 erection disorders from, IV:3016 ethnic differences in, III:2200 exercise for preventing, II:1249 fetal hemoglobin test and, II:1313 flesh-eating disease with, II:1337 furunculosis with, I:537 with gallbladder x-rays, III:1382 in gastric emptying disorders, III:1401 gestational (See Gestational diabetes) glycosylated hemoglobin test for, III:1468, 1469 with gout drugs, III:1479–1480 with heart attacks, III:1533 with heart transplantation, III:1545 high cholesterol and, II:789 in high risk pregnancy, III:1633 hypercoagulation from, III:1701 hyperhidrosis from, III:1704 with hypertension, II:930 hypothermia from, III:1754 with hypotonic duodenography, III:1759 with hysterectomy, III:1762 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1796 impotence from, III:1805, IV:2531 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 with interferons, III:1793 with isotretinoin, I:228 lactic acid test for, III:1945 laser eye surgery and, IV:2586 Legionnaires’ disease with, III:1972 with low back pain, III:2032 lung abscess with, III:2039 in men, III:2164 miscarriage from, III:2204 with mucormycosis, III:2231 with nalidixic acid, V:3448 neonatal jaundice from, III:1883 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 with nephrotoxic injury, IV:2338 with nitrofurantoin, V:3448 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 orthostatic hypotension from, IV:2411 osteomyelitis from, IV:2419 otitis externa with, IV:2432 from pancreatitis, IV:2480 paresthesia from, IV:2365 with penicillins, IV:2528 periodontitis from, IV:2547 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 with Peyronie’s disease, IV:2572 placental abruption from, IV:2612 from polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 polyhydramnios and, IV:2664 postural hypotension from, III:1752 premature menopause and, IV:2702 prepregnancy counseling and, IV:2712 protease inhibitors and, IV:2742 PTHC with, IV:2532 radial keratotomy and, IV:2804 retinal artery occlusion and, IV:2875, 2876 senior’s health and, IV:2996, 3001 sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 sildenafil citrate and, IV:3051, 3052 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 SSRIs with, IV:2992 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 from steroids, I:382, III:1774 stillbirth from, IV:3163 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:270 tests for, II:693, III:2201 thyroid hormones and, V:3313 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 hypothyroidism from, III:1756 indigestion from, III:1813 insulin-dependent (See Insulindependent diabetes mellitus) itching from, III:1874 ketoacidosis from, II:1055–1056 kidney failure from, II:806 with listeriosis, III:2012 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 myocardial ischemia from, III:1869 from myotonic dystrophy, III:2303 neuropathy from, II:1057–1058 from obesity, IV:2373 with oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2395 pancreatic cancer and, IV:2474, 2476 pernicious anemia from, I:181 recurrent miscarriages and, IV:2837 renal tubular acidosis and, IV:2858 retinal vein occlusion with, IV:2878 vs. Reye’s syndrome, IV:2895 with seborrheic dermatitis, II:1037 from sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 from spina bifida, IV:3126 sporotrichosis and, IV:3143 with tetracyclines, V:3267 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 from Turner syndrome, V:3418 Type 1 (See Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus) urinalysis for, V:3446 with vitiligo, V:3527 warts and, V:3548 in women, V:3576, 3577 Diabetic acidosis. See Diabetic ketoacidosis Diabetic adicosis. See Diabetic ketoacidosis Diabetic coma. See Diabetic ketoacidosis Diabetic control index. See Glycosylated hemoglobin test Diabetic foot with bunions, I:615 with cryotherapy, II:962 debridement for, II:1007 infections of, II:1053–1055 Diabetic gastroparesis. See Gastroparesis Diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1055–1056 acidosis from, III:2179 with diabetes mellitus, II:1049, 1050 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154, 1155 from growth hormone stimulation test, III:1488 hypophosphatemia from, IV:2585 magnesium deficiency from, III:2079 neutrophilia from, III:1993 Diabetic macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Diabetic neuropathies, II:1053, II:1057–1058, IV:2549, 2550, 2551, 2553–2554 acupuncture for, II:1052 blood-viscosity reducing agents for, I:520 Diabetic retinopathy, II:1052, IV:2890, V:3528 Diabetic ulcers, IV:3069 Diabinese. See Chlorpropamide Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders on ADHD, I:411 on anorexia nervosa, I:211, 212 on anxiety, I:319 on anxiety disorders, I:322–323 on bipolar disorder, I:485, 487 on dissociative identity disorder, III:2244 on gender identity disorder, III:1417–1418 on generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 on homosexuality, III:1416 on hysteria, III:1764 on intermittent explosive disorder, III:1845 on mania, III:2112 on mental retardation, III:2173 on mood disorders, III:2216 on paranoia, IV:2493 on paraphilias, IV:3018 on personality disorders, IV:2562 on schizoaffective disorder, IV:2956 schizophrenia, IV:2958–2960 on somatoform disorders, IV:3117 on substance abuse, IV:3208 on Tourette syndrome, V:3343 Diagnostic arthroscopic surgery. See Arthroscopy Diagnostic imaging for hiccups, III:1632 for lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1938 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for pica, IV:2596 for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 for strongyloidiasis, V:3292 See also specific imaging techniques Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children, II:883 Diagnostic mammogram. See Mammography Diagnostic tests for AIDS, I:82–83, 86 arthroscopic surgery as, I:362 with malingering, III:2101 with penicillins, IV:2528 sedation for, IV:2983 See also Genetic testing; specific tests Dialysate in dialysis, II:1059 3721 Dialysate with urethritis, V:3440 urinalysis for, V:3446 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 with vibriosis, V:3506 visual impairment from, V:3510 with vulvovaginitis, V:3540 Diabetes Control and Complications Trial, III:1469 Diabetes insipidus, II:1046–1047 antidiuretic hormone test for, I:266 hypernatremia from, III:1710 urinalysis for, V:3446 Diabetes mellitus, II:1047–1053, 1049 amputation from, I:157 antepartum tests with, I:221, 223 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 atherosclerosis from, I:394 Atkins diet and, I:402 with barbiturates, I:446 blastomycosis with, I:513 blood glucose tests for, I:528–530 bowel function and, I:565 bronchodilators with, I:601 cataracts from, II:673 with cellulitis, II:684 Charcot’s joints with, II:736 cholecystitis from, II:779 chronic kidney failure from, II:806 color blindness from, II:859 congenital brain defects from, II:891 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 with coronary heart disease, II:930 from cystic fibrosis, II:986 cystitis and, II:992 delirium from, II:1020 with Depo-Provera, II:1031 with dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 E. coli infections from, II:1235 endometrial cancer and, II:1188 environmental causes, I:492 eye examination and, II:1262 facial paralysis and, I:461 fatty liver from, II:1298 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 folliculitis with, II:1351 foot care with, II:1357 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369, 1370 frostbite and, II:1370 gallstones from, III:1388 gangrene from, III:1393 gas embolism and, III:1396 genetic causes, I:492 with glomerulonephritis, III:1461 with heart attacks, III:1533 from hemochromatosis, III:1574 hiccups from, III:1632 histoplasmosis with, III:1640 hypercholesterolemia from, III:1699 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1707 Dialysate in hemodialysis, I:45–46 Dialysis, II:1058–1061 cross infection from, III:1675 dysfunctional uterine bleeding from, II:1112 with escherichia coli, III:1581 for Fabry’s disease, III:2005 for food poisoning, II:1356 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 kidney (See Hemodialysis) in life support, III:2000 for magnesium poisoning, III:2079 for malaria, III:2090 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 with nephrectomy, IV:2332 for shellfish poisoning, II:1336 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3234 Diamox. See Diuretics Dian xue. See Acupressure Diaper rash, I:245, IV:2821 Diaper rash, II:1062–1064, 1063 Diapers, hepatitis A from, III:1596 Diaphragm (Anatomy) in emphysema, II:1173 in Heimlich maneuver, III:1565 in hiccups, III:1631 in nephrectomy, IV:2332 paralysis, V:3498 weakening of, III:2263 Diaphragmatic hernia. See Hiatal hernia Diaphragms (Contraceptive), II:911, II:1064–1065 cervicitis from, II:723 cystitis from, II:992 pyelonephritis and, IV:2789 for STD prevention, III:1474, IV:3023 with vulvovaginitis, V:3542 Diarrhea, II:1065–1068 acidosis from, III:2179 activated charcoal for, I:367, 368, II:731–732 from adenovirus infections, I:57 anal itching from, III:1875 from antacids, I:218, 219 from antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 antibiotic prophylaxis for, IV:2726 from balantidiasis, I:440, 441 beriberi and, I:469 bowel training for, I:565 with breastfeeding, III:1942 from Campylobacter, II:630 from carbohydrate intolerance, II:649 with cephalosporins, II:694 chronic pellagra from, IV:2515 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2743 3722 from pyloroplasty, IV:2792 riboflavin deficiency from, IV:2906 from SCID, IV:3009 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 from colonoscopy, II:857 from common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 from cyclosporiasis, II:981 deaths from, III:1408 dehydration from, II:1017 drugs for, I:264–266 from E. coli, II:1235, 1236 electrolyte imbalance from, II:1157 from enteral nutrition, V:3402 from enterobacteriaceae, II:1205 with enterostomies, II:1211 from erythromycins, II:1233 from fish and shellfish poisoning, II:1334, 1335, 1336 from fluke infection, II:1343 from food poisoning, II:1352–1355 from gallbladder x-ray, III:1382 from gangrene, III:1394 with gastrinomas, III:1403 from giardiasis, III:1450 from Hartnup disease, III:1511 from heavy metal poisoning, III:1560 hemorrhagic (See Hemorrhagic diarrhea) from histamine, III:2132 from histoplasmosis, III:1640 from hookworm disease, III:1667 hypokalemia and, III:1740 hyponatremia from, III:1743 from IBS, III:1865 IV fluid replenishment after, III:1853 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 from laxatives, III:1964 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 malnutrition from, III:2104 mineral deficiencies from, III:2190 from mineral toxicity, III:2195 from obesity surgery, IV:2380 orthostatic hypotension from, IV:2411 from penicillin, IV:2528 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 from radiation therapy, II:1191 from Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 from salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 from shigella, IV:3027 from sildenafil citrate, IV:3054 spurious polycythemia from, IV:2982 from tapeworm disease, V:3240 travelers (See Traveler’s diarrhea) after ulcer surgery, V:3428 urinalysis for, V:3446 from vibriosis, V:3506 Diastix, for diabetes mellitus, II:1050 Diastolic murmur. See Heart murmurs Diathermy for cervical cancer, II:713 with colposcopy, II:865 for heat treatment, III:1559–1560 for herniated disk, III:1629 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for tennis elbow, V:3252 Diazepam abuse of, IV:3207 for alcohol withdrawal, V:3573 for anxiety, I:231–233, 320, 466 for balloon valvuloplasty, I:442 for central nervous system depression, II:689 for cerebral palsy, II:706 with cisapride, I:273 for convulsions, I:253 for dementia, II:1026 with dicyclomine, I:309 gynecomastia from, III:1497 for heart attacks, III:1534 heartburn from, III:1553 with laser eye surgery, IV:2587 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 as muscle relaxant, III:2259, 2260 for night terrors, IV:2356 for phobias, IV:2583 with prochlorperazine, I:294 for prostatitis, IV:2741 for sedation, IV:2984 for spasticity, III:2253 for venography, V:3493 Diazinon, III:1842 Dibasic sodium phosphate, III:1963 Dibenzepines, I:301 See also Atypical antipsychotic agents Dibucaine, for local anesthesia, I:190 DIC. See Disseminated intravascular coagulation Dichlorphenamide, V:3449 Dichlorvos, III:1842 Dichuchwa. See Bejel Dickens, Charles, IV:2597 Diclofenac, IV:2361 Dicloxacillin for carbuncle, I:537 for clenched fist injury, II:821 for furunculosis, I:537 for mastitis, III:2132 Dicumarol alanine aminotransferase levels from, III:2024 as anticoagulant, I:252 with aspirin, I:379 Dicyclomine for IBS, III:1867 for spasms, I:308–309 DID. See Dissociative identity disorder GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 after gastrectomy, III:1399 for gay and lesbian health, III:1416 with growth hormone tests, III:1489 guidelines on (See Recommended dietary allowance) in Hartnup disease, III:1511 headache from, III:1523 for heart attack prevention, III:1535 after heart valve replacement, III:1551 heartburn and, III:1555 hepatitis A and, III:1597 high cholesterol and, II:787, 789, 790 high fat, breast cancer from, I:578 hives from, III:1642 hypercholesterolemia and, III:1699, 1700 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1708 for hypertension, I:203, 204–205, II:627 hyponatremia from, III:1742 with IBS, III:1866 immunologic diseases and, III:1787 indigestion from, III:1813, 1815 for ischemia prevention, III:1871 with jaw fixation, III:1885 kidney cancer and, III:1911 with kidney function tests, III:1913 liquid (See Liquid diet) with macular degeneration, III:2075–2076, 2077 malnutrition from, III:2103–2105 in men’s health, III:2165 for mineral deficiencies, III:2193 neuralgia from, IV:2339 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388 otitis media and, IV:2435 pancreatic cancer and, IV:2477 pellagra and, IV:2515 with periodic paralysis, IV:2544 after portal vein bypass, IV:2676 during pregnancy, IV:2386, 2698, 2712 for premature labor prevention, IV:2701, 2708 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for protein-energy malnutrition prevention, IV:2744 for pulmonary edema prevention, IV:2778 purine in, V:3442 for radiation injury prevention, IV:2809 rectal cancer from, IV:2828 rectal polyps and, IV:2835 for renal artery occlusion, IV:2856 for renal artery stenosis, IV:2857 for restless legs syndrome prevention, IV:2871 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for sarcomas, IV:2944–2945 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 scurvy from, IV:2978 for sedation, IV:2983 for senior’s health, IV:2996, 2998, 2999 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for stomatitis, IV:3171 for sudden infant death syndrome, IV:3215 after T & A, V:3326 vegetarianism, V:3484 vitamin A and, V:3512 vitamin B6 and, V:3513–3514 vitamin E and, V:3517 vitamin K and, V:3520 for women, V:3577 See also Diet therapy; Malnutrition; Nutrition Diet pills. See Appetite suppressants Diet therapy, II:1068–1070, 1069, IV:2367–2368 for ADHD, I:413 for adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 for amenorrhea, I:146 for aortic aneurysm prevention, I:326 for bed-wetting, I:455 for beriberi, I:470 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for blastomycosis, I:513 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 for cataracts, II:675 for Chagas’ disease, II:728 for cholecystitis, II:780 for chronic kidney failure, II:808 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cold sores, II:846 for colon cancer, II:853 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:899 for coronary heart disease, II:932–933 for cough, II:942 for cystic fibrosis, II:988 for cystitis, II:994 for detoxification, II:1042 for diabetes mellitus, II:1051 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for dizziness, II:1096 for dysmenorrhea, II:1118 for edema, II:1136 for embolism, I:355 fat-restricted (See Fat-restricted diet) for fatigue, II:1295 for fecal incontinence, II:1301 for fibroadenoma, II:1322 for folliculitis, II:1352 for frostbite, II:1372 for fructose intolerance, III:1621 for gastritis, III:1407 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 for genital herpes, III:1442 for gestational diabetes, III:1448 3723 Diet therapy Didanosine for AIDS, I:80, 303, 304 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 Didthin. See Myrrh Diencephalon, in Korsakoff’s syndrome, III:1930 Diesel, allergies to, III:2234 Diet acidosis from, III:2179 acne and, I:26, 27 aging and, I:72 for AIDS, I:81 for alcoholism, I:94, 98 for altitude sickness prevention, I:134 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:137, 138 angina pectoris and, I:196 for anoxia, I:217 with anticoagulants, I:251, 252 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311 appendicitis and, I:342 with ascites, I:373 with aviation medicine, I:427 in ayurvedic medicine, I:428, 431 binge eating disorder and, I:481–482 with bladder stones, I:510 with bone disorder agents, I:542 in bowel function, I:565 for bowel resection, I:564 for brain tumors, I:573 in bursitis, I:620 cancer and, II:632, 637 catecholamines levels with, II:677 celiac disease and, II:681, 683 cervical cancer from, II:716 with chemotherapy, II:742 cleft lip and palate and, II:819 cold sores from, II:845–846 colon cancer from, II:849 for colostomy, II:863 for congenital brain defects, II:892 constipation from, II:906 after coronary artery bypass grafting, II:927 with coronary stenting, II:934, 935 dehydration from, II:1018 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 in diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1093–1094 dizziness from, II:1095 for electrolyte disorders, II:1156 esophageal cancer and, II:1240 fecal occult blood test and, II:1302, 1303 fibrocystic condition of the breast and, II:1325 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for food poisoning, II:1355, 1356 for fracture prevention, II:1365 for gallbladder x-rays, III:1382 gallstones from, III:1388 gas from, I:271 Diet therapy with glomerulonephritis, III:1462 for gout, III:1479 for head and neck cancer, III:1519 for heart failure prevention, III:1540 for hemolytic anemia, III:1579 for hemorrhoids, III:1593, 1594 for hepatitis B, III:1601 for hepatitis C, III:1604 for hepatitis G, III:1609 for hiatal hernias, III:1624 for high cholesterol, II:794 high fiber diet (See High fiber diet) high protein diet (See High protein diet) for histoplamsosis, III:1641 HRT and, III:1673 for hydronephrosis, III:1690 for hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 for hypertension, I:475, III:1722 for hyperthyroidism, III:1725 for hypoglycemia, III:1736–1737 for hypokalemia, III:1740 for hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 for IBS, III:1867 for ileus, III:1780 for indigestion, III:1814 for infertility, III:1832 for insomnia, III:1844–1845 juice, II:1294 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for keratitis, III:1906 for kidney failure, II:808 for Korsakoff’s syndrome, III:1930, 1931 for lead poisoning, III:1967–1968 for lipoidosis, III:2003 liquid (See Liquid diet) low cholesterol (See Low cholesterol diet) low fat, II:1070 macrobiotic (See Macrobiotic diet) for malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 for malnutrition, III:2104 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for mumps, III:2256 for muscular dystrophy, III:2267 NSAIDs and, IV:2362 for obesity, IV:2374, 2376 with obesity surgery, IV:2378, 2379, 2380 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 for palpitations, IV:2466 for Parkinson disease, IV:2501 pellagra and, IV:2516 for periodic paralysis, IV:2545 for phenylketonuria, IV:2577 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for PMS, IV:2711 for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 3724 for prostatitis, IV:2741 for psoriasis, IV:2758 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for Refsum disease, III:2005 for renal tubular acidosis, IV:2858 for retinoblastoma, IV:2887 for RSV, IV:2869 for seizures, IV:2989 for shigellosis, IV:3028 for sleep disorders, IV:3092 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for starvation, IV:3162 for stress, IV:3186 for stress reduction, IV:3189 for syphilis, IV:3230 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for thyroid cancer, V:3306, 3308 for TIA, V:3373 traditional Chinese medicine and, V:3360 for vegetarians, V:3286–3287 Dietary calcium, III:2193, 2195–2197 with alendronate, I:542 with anticonvulsants, I:255 for cholestasis, II:785 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for eclampsia/preeclampsia prevention, IV:2694 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for endometriosis, II:1194 for fractures, II:1365 after gastrectomy, III:1399 after heart valve replacement, III:1552 hyperparathyroidism and, III:1713 for insomnia, III:1845 for kyphosis prevention, III:1932 with lactose intolerance, III:1946 for lead poisoning, III:1967 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 for osteoporosis, IV:2428, 2998 for palpitations, IV:2466 after parathyroidectomy, IV:2498 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 during pregnancy, IV:2712 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 scoliosis and, IV:2972 for shingles, IV:3032 with tetracyclines, V:3267 Dietary fats aortic aneurysms and, I:325, 326 in breast milk, III:1942 in healthy diets, III:2105 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1708 in lipoidosis, III:2003 with macular degeneration, III:2075–2076 in malnutrition, III:2104 restricted (See Fat-restricted diet) triglycerides tests for, V:3393 Dietary fiber, IV:2367 for colon cancer, II:853 colon cancer and, II:849 for Crohn’s disease, II:959 in diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1093–1094 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 hypercholesterolemia and, III:1699 during pregnancy, IV:2712 for rectal cancer, IV:2832 rectal cancer and, IV:2828 See also High fiber diet; Psyllium Dietary iron. See Iron Dietary minerals. See Minerals Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994, III:1620 Dietary supplements, IV:2367–2368 for adrenal gland cancer, I:60 aging and, I:70–71 for alcoholism, I:94, 98 for allergies, I:121 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:139–140 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:166 for angiomas, I:496 with Atkins diet, I:142, 402 for aviation medicine, I:428 for beriberi, I:470 for brain tumors, I:573 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for COPD, II:811 for costochondritis, II:940 for Crohn’s disease, II:959 drug interactions with, II:1102, 1103–1104 for emphysema, II:1174–1175 with epoetin, III:1792 for fatty liver, II:1299 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 folic acid (See Folic acid) for gastritis, III:1407 for glomerulonephritis, III:1462 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 in life support, III:2000 for Lyme disease, III:2060 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for neutropenia, IV:2354 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for pica, IV:2596 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for pregnancy, IV:2698 for premature labor prevention, IV:2701 for psoriasis, IV:2758 for psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in heartburn, III:1553 Digestive system bleeding, III:1777 in colic, II:847 in cutis laxa, II:978 diseases of (See Digestive system diseases) foreign objects in, II:1358 in mastocytosis, III:2132 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 obstruction of, II:794 Digestive system abnormalities with amyloidosis, I:162 celiac disease from, IV:3173 FTT and, II:1278 from holoprosencephaly, II:890 Digestive system diseases beriberi and, I:470 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 lactose intolerance from, III:1945 in men, III:2165 paracentesis for, IV:2489 upper GI series for, V:3438 See also Meckel’s diverticulum Digestive system ulcers, V:3438 Digestive tract cancer with familial polyposis, II:1287 indigestion from, III:1813 pancreatic, IV:2474 Digestive tract diseases from scleroderma, IV:2966–2967 Digital clubbing, in PAP, IV:2776 Digital hearing aids, III:1525 Digital holoraphy, I:572 Digital mammogram. See Mammography Digital rectal examination, IV:2833–2834 for anal cancer, I:170 anoscopy after, I:214 in men’s health, III:2165 prostate biopsy and, IV:2727, 2728–2729 for prostate cancer, IV:2730–2731 prostate ultrasound and, IV:2736 for prostatitis, IV:2740 with PSA test, IV:2734–2735 for rectal cancer, IV:2829 for rectal polyps, IV:2834 Digitalis (Drug). See Digitalis glycosides Digitalis glycosides, II:1073–1075 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 for arrhythmias, I:353 for asbestosis, I:370 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 for beriberi, I:470 with bronchodilators, I:602 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 for cor pulmonale, II:917 with decongestants, II:1012 with diuretics, II:1090 for edema, II:1135 for heart failure, III:1540 for myocarditis, III:2290 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 for palpitations, IV:2466 for sick sinus syndrome, IV:3040 with SSRIs, IV:2993 Digitalis purpurea. See Foxglove Digitoxin, for heart disease, II:1073 Digoxin for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:408 with benzodiazepines, I:233 with bronchodilators, I:602 for congenital heart disease, II:901 with diuretics, II:1090, 1102 for edema, II:1135 for heart disease, II:1073 indigestion from, III:1813 for mitral valve prolapse, III:2208 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 overdose, II:1105 for ventricular aneurysm, V:3497 Dihydroergotamine, for cluster headache, II:825 Dihydrovitamin K. See Vitamin K 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D for hypocalcemia, III:1731 hypokalemia and, III:1731 for vitamin D-resistant rickets, IV:2585 Dilantin. See Phenytoin Dilatation balloon (See Balloon dilatation) eye examination for, II:1264 from incompetent cervix, III:1812 Dilatation and curettage, II:1075–1076 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113, 1114 for endometrial cancer, II:1189–1190 hysteroscopy and, III:1767 hysterosonography for, III:1768 for menstrual disorders, III:2170 for miscarriage, III:2205 for partial abortion, III:2186 for postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2680 vs. vacuum aspiration, III:1685 See also Vacuum curettage Dilatation and evacuation. See Vacuum curettage Dilated cardiomyopathy. See Congestive cardiomyopathy Dilation. See Dilatation Dilation and evacuation. See Vacuum curettage Dilaudid. See Meperidine 3725 Dilaudid for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 smoking cessation and, IV:3107 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 with tetracyclines, V:3267 for vegetarians, V:3487 for vitamin A deficiency, V:3512 for vitamin B6 deficiency, V:3514 for vitamin E deficiency, V:3518 Diethylcarbamazepine citrate, I:273 Diethylcarbamazine for elephantiasis, II:1167 for filariasis, II:1331 Diethylpropion, II:691, IV:2376 Diethylstilbestrol birth defects from, I:490 colposcopy for, II:864 ectopic pregnancy from, II:1131 incompetent cervix from, III:1812 recurrent miscarriages and, IV:2836 Diethystilbestrol, xposure to, II:1039–1040 Diets. See Diet; Diet therapy Differentiation, in family therapy, II:1288–1289 Difficult labor. See Dystocia Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis, III:1975 Diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1070–1071 Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis, IV:3136 Diffuse neuropathy autonomic (See Autonomic neuropathy) diabetic (See Diabetic neuropathies) peripheral (See Peripheral neuropathy) Diffuse toxic goiter. See Graves’ disease Diffuse uveitis. See Uveitis Diffusion, in hemodialysis, II:1060 Diflucan. See Fluconazole DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:900, II:1071–1073, III:1785, 1787 Digestion in Addison’s disease, I:53 with aging, I:69 bile in, II:773 dyspepsia and, II:1118 with giardiasis, III:1450 in lipoidosis, III:2003 liver function for, III:1881 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 with neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 with overhydration, IV:2449 sodium for, III:1742 with surgery for obesity, IV:2378 thyroxine regulation of, III:1756 Digestive enzymes, IV:2473 deficiencies of, II:649 Dill Dill, for colic, II:848 Dilocaine. See Lidocaine Diloxanide furoate, for amebiasis, I:145 Diltiazem with antimalarials, I:288 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 for coronary heart disease, II:931 for hypertension, II:629 Diltiazem hydrochloride. See Diltiazem Dimercaprol for heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 for lead poisoning, III:1967 Dimetapp. See Brompheniramine Dimethicone, in antacids, I:217–218 Dimethylglycine, for autism, I:421 Dimethylselenide, III:2195 Dinoflagellates, II:1334, 1335 Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, I:565 Dioscorea villosa. See Mexican wild yam Dioscorides, Pedanius, I:348 Diovan. See Valsartan Dioxin, endometriosis and, II:1193 Diphenhydramine with alemtuzumab, I:102 for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:118, 277, 278 for atopic dermatitis, I:404 for conjunctivitis, II:904 delirium from, II:1021 for fish poisoning, II:1335 for hives, III:1642 for insomnia, I:282 for itching, III:1875 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for motion sickness, III:2219 Diphenhydramine hydrochloride. See Diphenhydramine Diphenoxylate for campylobacteriosis, II:631 for cryptosporidiosis, II:967 for cyclosporiasis, II:982 for diarrhea, II:1067 overdose, II:1105 for travelers diarrhea, V:3380 Diphenoxylate-atropine with cephalosporins, II:694 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 Diphenylbutylpiperadines, I:301 Diphenylhydantoin. See Phenytoin 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate deficiencies of, V:3420 test of, V:3419–3420 Diphtheria, II:1076–1079 adenoid hyperplasia from, I:55 croup from, II:959 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 seizures from, IV:2986 vaccination for, V:3465 Diphtheria antitoxin, II:1078 Diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine, V:3465 3726 children’s health and, II:762 for diphtheria, II:1078 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 for tetanus, V:3265 Diphtheritic polyneuropathy, IV:2550, 2554 Diphyllobothrium latum, V:3240, 3241 Diplegia, IV:2491 Diplopia from acoustic neuroma, I:29 vs. amblyopia, I:141 eye muscle surgery and, II:1269 with nasal trauma, IV:2318 from ophthalmoplegia, IV:2394 from orbital fractures, III:2137 with strabismus, IV:3176 vision training for, V:3508 Diprivan. See Propofol Diprolene. See Betamethasone Dipyridamole for coronary angiography, II:931 thallium scans and, I:395, V:3278 for TIA, V:3372 Diquinol. See Iodoquinol Direct DNA mutation analysis, III:1434, 1436 Directed blood donation. See Blood donation Directed daydreaming. See Guided imagery Directional atherectomy, I:392 Directly observed therapy, for antituberculosis drugs, I:310 Dirithromycin, I:242, III:2278 Disability insurance, with malingering, III:2100 Disabled persons from chronic pain, IV:2459 Feldenkrais method for, II:1304 Disaccharides, in carbohydrates, II:649 DISC. See Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children Disciform keratitis. See Keratitis Discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1079–1081 Discontinuous flow centrifugation, IV:2619 Discrimination, III:1414–1415, 1416–1417 Disease Modifying Anti-Rheumatic Drugs, I:305, IV:2901 Disease outbreaks. See Epidemics Diseases. See specific conditions and treatments Disinfection antiseptics for, I:307 for cross infection, III:1675 for infection control, III:1823 for insecticide poisoning, III:1842 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 for RSV prevention, IV:2869 for wound repair, III:1936, 1937 Disk herniation. See Herniated disk Disk removal, II:1081–1082, III:1629 Dislocations, II:1082–1085, 1084f arthrography for, I:360–361 arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 from cutis laxa, II:978 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 with fractures, II:1362 hip (See Hip dislocation) immobilization and, III:1780–1781 jaw, III:2136 from joint replacement, III:1892 kneecap removal for, III:1928 with nasal trauma, IV:2318 with sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 traction for, V:3357 wilderness medicine for, V:3562 x-rays for, I:557 See also Fractures Disopyramide with calcium channel blockers, II:628 for heart arrhythmia, I:233 for heart attacks, III:1534 Disorganized schizophrenia, IV:2958 Disorientation from acidosis, III:2179 from delirium, II:1020 from dementia, II:1025 from head injuries, III:1521 from hypothermia, III:1754 from inert gas narcosis, IV:2356–2357 from joint replacement, III:1892 from liver encephalopathy, III:2023 from malnutrition, III:2104 from melioidosis, III:2150 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 Disposable lenses. See Contact lenses Disposable underwear, for fecal incontinence, II:1301 Dissecting aneurysm, I:325 Disseminated coccidioidomycosis, II:834 Disseminated histoplasmosis, III:1639–1641 Disseminated intravascular coagulation, II:826, 827, 828, 829 ARDS from, I:67 from dengue fever, II:1028 fibrin split products and, II:1318–1319 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 from necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 from placental abruption, IV:2612 platelet count for, IV:2625 PT test for, IV:2750 Dissociative amnesia. See Dissociative disorders Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified. See Dissociative disorders Dissociative disorders, II:1085–1088 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for COPD, II:811 for craniotomy, II:947 with creatinine test, II:949 with digitalis, II:1074 drug interactions with, II:1102 for edema, II:1135 for elderly, I:70 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154, 1155, 1156 electrolyte imbalance from, II:1157 erection disorders with, IV:3051 food poisoning and, II:1355 for glomerulonephritis, III:1462 gout from, III:1478 for heart attacks, III:1533 for heart failure, III:1539 with hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 hyperkalemia from, III:1705 for hypertension, III:1722 hypokalemia from, II:1158, III:1739 hyponatremia from, III:1742 hypophosphatemia from, IV:2585–2586 for kidney stones, III:1919 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 for lymphedema, III:2067 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 for magnesium poisoning, III:2079 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 metabolic alkalosis from, III:2180 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for myocarditis, III:2290 for nephritis, IV:2334 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2336 for nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 orthostatic hypotension from, IV:2411 ototoxicity from, IV:2437 for overhydration, IV:2449 for papilledema, IV:2488 for pericarditis, IV:2540 for periodic paralysis, IV:2545 photosensitivity from, III:1715, IV:2589 with plasma renin activity, IV:2617 for PMS, IV:2710 prolonged QT syndrome from, IV:2724 for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785 secondary polycythemia and, IV:2982 sodium deficiency from, III:2191 for subdural hematoma, IV:3205 with sulfonamides, IV:3216, 3218 with sunscreens, IV:3221 uric acid tests and, V:3442 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 for ventricular aneurysm, V:3497 Diuril. See Chlorothiazide; Hydrochlorothiazide GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Diurnal enuresis. See Bed-wetting Diurnal variation with cortisol test, II:938 with creatinine test, II:949 with plasma renin activity, IV:2617 Divale. See Belladonna Divalproex with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 with cephalosporins, II:694 with estrogens, III:1670 with gout drugs, III:1481 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3300 See also Valproic acid Divalproex sodium. See Valproic acid Dive tables, for decompression, II:1009 Divers Alert Network, II:1009 Diverticula. See Diverticulum Diverticulitis, II:1090–1094 anorectal fistula with, I:210 ascites from, I:371 barium enema for, I:447 bowel function and, I:565 with constipation, III:1963 constipation from, II:906 with peritoneal dialysis, I:46, II:1059 Diverticulosis, II:1090–1094 colonoscopy for, II:856 gas from, I:271 Diverticulum, II:888 bladder, from cutis laxa, II:978 colostomy for, II:861 in diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1091 duodenal, from cutis laxa, II:978 esophageal, II:1240 esophageal, from cutis laxa, II:978 ruptured bowel resection for, I:563–565 peritonitis from, IV:2556 upper GI series for, V:3438 Divine sage. See Sage Diving decompression sickness from, II:1008 gas embolism from, III:1396–1397 inert gas narcosis and, IV:2356–2357 sinusitis and, IV:3059 Divorce marriage counseling for, III:2122 mood disorders from, III:2216 Dixarit. See Clonidine Dizygotic twins, III:2247 Dizziness, II:1094–1096 from atherosclerosis, I:394 from decongestants, II:1011 from diabetes insipidus, II:1047 with exercise, II:1249 from gammaglobulin, III:1392 from heat treatment, III:1560 from labyrinthitis, III:1935–1936 from mastoidectomy, III:2133 3727 Dizziness Ganser’s syndrome as, II:1277 mental status examination for, III:2177, 2178 self mutilation with, IV:2993 vs. somatoform disorders, IV:3113–3117 Dissociative Disorders Interview Schedule, II:1087, III:2245 Dissociative Experiences Scale, II:1087, III:2246 Dissociative fugue. See Dissociative disorders Dissociative identity disorder, III:2244–2247 from dissociative disorder, II:1085 family therapy for, II:1288 Distal muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267 Distal phalanx fractures, II:1332–1333 Distal renal tubular acidosis, IV:2858 Disulfiram for alcoholism, I:98 with alprazolam, I:232 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with caffeine, II:626 for cocaine addiction, II:833 with erythromycins, II:1233 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 with penicillins, IV:2529 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:261 Dital. See Phendimetrazine Dithiolthiones, for cancer, II:637 Ditropan. See Oxybutynin chloride Diucardin. See Hydroflumethiazide Diurese. See Thiazide diuretics Diuretics, II:1088–1090 with ACE inhibitors, I:203, 205 with aldosterone test, I:101 for Alport’s syndrome, I:132 ammonia levels from, III:2024 for amyloidosis, I:162 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 for aortic valve insufficiency, I:328 for APSGN, I:48 aromatherapy as, I:348 for asbestosis, I:370 for ascites, I:372–373 with aspirin, I:379 vs. barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 for beriberi, I:470 bilirubin levels from, III:2024 with bleeding time test, I:514 with bronchodilators, I:602 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 with cholesterol tests, II:793 for congenital heart disease, II:901 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 constipation from, II:906 Dizziness from Meniere’s disease, III:2152 from multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 nausea with, IV:2324 neurologic examination for, IV:2350 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 with palpitations, IV:2465 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 from sildenafil citrate, IV:3054 from vasodilators, V:3484 DJD. See Osteoarthritis DKA. See Diabetic ketoacidosis DM. See Myotonic dystrophy DMARDs. See Disease Modifying Anti-Rheumatic Drugs DMD. See Duchenne muscular dystrophy DNA analysis for acoustic neuroma, I:30 for Alport’s syndrome, I:131 autoradiograms in, III:1432, 1433 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for Down Syndrome, I:220 for E. coli, II:1236 for Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 gene therapy and, III:1419, 1420–1423, III:1421 in genetic testing, III:1432–1433, 1434, 1436, 1438 for glaucoma, III:1461 for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 for hepatitis G, III:1609 indirect testing, III:1434 for Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, III:1983 for Prader-Willi syndrome, IV:2689 See also Chromosome analysis; Genetic testing DNA probes, III:1973 DNA viruses adenoviruses as, I:56 hepatitis B as, III:1600 DNase in cystic fibrosis, II:989 in streptococcal antibody tests, IV:3182 D.O. See Osteopathy Do-In. See Acupressure Dobutamine, with thallium heart scan, V:3278 Dobutamine hydrochloride, IV:2779 Dobutrex. See Dobutamine hydrochloride Dock, allergic rhinitis from, I:111 Docosahexanoic acid, IV:2560, 2561 Documentation, for psychiatric confinement, IV:2760 Docusate, as laxative, III:1964 Dodoens, Rembert, III:1617 Dog rowan tree. See Cramp bark 3728 Dogs bites from (See Bites and stings) cutaneous larvae migrans from, II:974–975 echinococcosis from, II:1127, 1128 guide (See Guide dogs) leishmaniasis from, III:1976 leptospirosis from, III:1981 plague and, IV:2614 rat-bite fever from, IV:2822 Dolasetron, for nausea, II:642, 643, 644 Dolophine. See Methadone Domeboro, for cerumen impaction, II:710 Domestic violence, I:16, 17, 18 biting with, I:498, 500 death in women and, V:3576, 3577 substance abuse and, IV:3206 Dominant functioning, IV:2350–2351 Dominant inheritance birth defects from, I:491 in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, II:734 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from, II:951, 952–953 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, II:1140 myotonic dystrophy, III:2301–2302 osteogenesis imperfecta, IV:2416–2417 in osteogenesis imperfecta, IV:2417 Parkinson disease, IV:2500 polycystic kidney disease, IV:2652 Tourette syndrome, V:3341–3345 tremor as, V:3381 See also specific disorders Donepezil, for Alzheimer’s disease, II:1026 Donepezil hydrochloride, for Alzheimer’s disease, I:138, IV:3000 Dong quai for anemia, I:184 for oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 for PMS, IV:2711 Donkey’s ears. See Mullein Donor Deferrel Register, I:525 Donovan bodies, III:1483 Donovania granulomatis. See Calymmatobacterium granulomatis Donovanosis. See Granuloma inguinale Doonheadclock. See Dandelion Dooryard plantain. See Plantain DOPA, in albinism, I:91 Dopamine in bipolar disorder, I:486 catecholamines tests for, II:677 cocaine and, II:832 with growth hormone tests, III:1487 heartburn from, III:1553 in mood disorders, III:2216 in movement disorders, III:2222, 2223 in Parkinson disease, I:295–296 personality disorders and, IV:2565 pharmacogenetics and, IV:2574 prolactin test and, IV:2723 in schizophrenia, IV:2959 for septic shock, IV:3005 Dopamine agonists for Parkinson disease, IV:2502 for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 for schizophrenia, IV:2962 Dopamine hydrochloride, IV:2779 Dopar. for sleep disorders, IV:3000 Doppler echocardiography, II:1129 for peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 for spinal stenosis, IV:3136 for stillbirth, IV:3163 transcranial, V:3371 Doppler ultrasonography, I:4, II:1097–1098 for deep vein thrombosis, II:1013 for eyes, II:1259 for pregnancy, IV:2525–2526 after sympathectomy, IV:3225 transcranial (See Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography) Doral. See Quazepam Dorsal root zone surgery, IV:2340 Doryx. See Doxycycline Dosages adjustment of, for drug interactions, II:1103 drug therapy monitoring and, II:1107 in radiation therapy, IV:2807, 2809 Doshas, I:430 DOSS. See Dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate DOT. See Directly observed therapy Double barrel colostomy. See Colostomy Double-contrast enema. See Barium enema Double depression, II:1033 Double vision. See Diplopia Douching, III:1694 for gonorrhea, III:1473 with STDs, IV:3023 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 with vulvovaginitis, V:3540, 3542 Dowager’s hump, IV:2426 Down syndrome, II:1098–1101 with acute leukemia, III:1987 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127, 128 Alzheimer’s disease and, III:2174 amniocentesis for, I:154 antenatal tests for, I:220 with bunions, I:615 cause of, II:798 from celiac disease, II:682 with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 with congenital heart diseases, II:901 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 chest, II:743–745 for mastectomy, III:2129, 2130 for mastoidectomy, III:2133 for orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2407 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 from pancreatectomy, IV:2469 for pericardial effusion, IV:2537 postural (See Postural drainage) with radial neck dissection, IV:2814 sepsis from, IV:3004 Drama therapy, IV:2686 Dramamine. See Diphenhydramine Drancunculus medinensis, II:1330 Draw-A-Man test, I:367 Draw-A-Person Questionnaire, I:367 DRE. See Digital rectal examination; Digital rectal examination Dreams, III:1843, IV:3088, V:3279–3280 Dressings. See Bandages Dried fruit, tapeworms in, V:3240 Drill biopsy. See Bone biopsy Drinking water, contaminated, II:781–782 Dristan Cold and Cough. See Guaifenesin Drixoral Cough Liquid Caps. See Dextromethorphan Dronabinol, for nausea, II:643–644, 645 Droplet precautions. See Universal precautions Drosera, for laryngitis, III:1958 Drosera rotundifolia. See Sundew Drossman, Douglas A., III:1866–1867 Drowning, vs. near drowning, IV:2327 Drowsiness nausea with, IV:2324 with seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 Drug abuse, IV:3206–3212 acupuncture for, I:39 acute kidney failure from, I:44 amenorrhea from, I:147 bacteremia and, I:436 with barbiturates, I:446 with benzodiazepines, I:232, 467 bipolar disorder from, I:486 botulism from, I:560 with carbuncle, I:536 with cocaine, II:831–834 in conduct disorder, II:883 congenital heart disease from, II:902 endocarditis from, II:1183 furunculosis with, I:536 gas embolism and, III:1397 with gastrostomy, III:1411 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415 group therapy for, III:1485 heart failure from, III:1538 with heart transplantation, III:1545 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 hepatitis B vaccines for, III:1602 impotence from, III:1805 infection control for, III:1822 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 jaundice from, IV:2330 methadone treatment for, III:2181–2183 in oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2396–2397 paranoia from, IV:2493 paraphilias with, IV:3018 parental, child abuse from, II:754 PET scan for, IV:2677 premature labor and, IV:2701 prematurity with, IV:2706 in rape victims, IV:2818 with septic shock, IV:3005 spinal cord injuries from, IV:3128 SSRIs with, IV:2992 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3202 sudden infant death syndrome from, IV:3213–3215 syphilis and, IV:3226 TB tests and, V:3404 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 Drug Abuse Control Amendment of 1965, III:2073 Drug Abuse Warning Network, III:2074 Drug hypersensitivity, I:115, 116, 122 vs. botulism, I:560 immune complex test for, III:1783 with mechlorethamine, II:976 vs. syphilis, IV:3021 Drug-induced dyskinesia. See Tardive dyskinesia Drug-induced hepatitis, III:1607–1608 Drug-induced hypoglycemia. See Hypoglycemia Drug-induced lupus. See Systemic lupus erythematosus Drug overdose, II:1104–1107 acidosis from, III:2179 activated charcoal for, I:367–368, II:731–732 with central nervous system depressants, II:689 dialysis for, II:1058 with gammaglobulin, III:1391–1392 ipecac and, III:1858 kidney damage from, IV:2337 of methadone, III:2181 poisoning and, IV:2644 respiratory alkalosis and, IV:2862 from substance abuse, IV:3209 substance abuse and, IV:3209 vitamin tests for, V:3520, 3521 Drug poisoning. See Drug toxicity Drug resistance antibiotics (See Microbial drug resistance) antimalarials and, I:286 in candidiasis, II:647 3729 Drug resistance CVS for, II:798, 801 from fragile X syndrome, II:1367 genetic counseling for, III:1429 Hirschsprung’s disease and, III:1635 maternal age and, I:492, II:798 mental retardation from, III:2174 myelodysplastic syndrome and, III:2279 periodontitis from, IV:2547 sex hormone tests for, IV:3014 from Turner syndrome, V:3418 ventricular septal defect from, V:3501 Downers. See Barbiturates Doxazosin for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1203 for BPH, I:129, 130 for hypertension, I:129, 130 Doxepin, for pain, IV:2460 Doxil. See Liposomal doxorubicin Doxorubicin for cancer, I:508, II:740 G6PD and, III:1465 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 in MOPP/ABVC chemotherapy, III:1646 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472 for small cell lung cancer, III:2049 for stomach cancer, IV:3167 Doxycycline, I:242, V:3266 for acne, I:25 for chlamydia with gonorrhea, III:1473 after rape, IV:2819 with dairy products, II:1102 for ehrlichiosis, II:1142 for inclusion conjunctivitis, III:1811 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 for leptospirosis, III:1982 for Lyme disease, III:2060 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for parrot fever, IV:2506 for Q fever, IV:2797 for syphilis, IV:3229 for vibriosis, V:3507 2,3-DPG. See 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate Dr. Atkins’ Diet Revolution, I:401 Dr. Dean Ornish’s Program for Reversing Heart Disease, III:1513 Dracontiasis. See Guinea worm infection Dracunculiasis. See Guinea worm infection Dracunculus medinensis, III:1494 Drager, Glenn, IV:3038 Dragon bones, for insomnia, IV:3092 Drainage (Surgical), III:1427 abscess (See Abscess drainage) Drug resistance to chemotherapy, II:641 cross infection and, III:1674, 1676 with enterobacterial infections, II:1205 with gonorrhea, III:1473 with hemophilus infections, III:1586 with HIV, I:86 infection control and, III:1822 malaria and, III:2090 microbial (See Microbial drug resistance) ophthalmic antibiotics and, I:243 in salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 sepsis from, IV:3004 with tuberculosis, I:310 Drug screening. See Drug testing Drug testing for cocaine, II:833 for substance abuse, IV:3209 urinalysis for, V:3443 Drug therapy. See Chemotherapy Drug therapy monitoring, II:1107–1108, IV:2871 Drug-to-drug interactions. See Drugs, interactions Drug-to-food interactions. See Drugs, interactions Drug tolerance with cancer therapy, II:639, 642 with central nervous system depressants, II:689 with opioid analgesics, I:176 substance abuse and, IV:3208 Drug toxicity, IV:2643, 2644 drug therapy monitoring for prevention, II:1107 sideroblastic anemia from, IV:3048 thrombocytopenia with, II:827–828 Drug withdrawal. See Substance withdrawal syndrome Drugs activated charcoal and, I:368, II:731 acute kidney failure from, I:44 allergic reaction to (See Drug hypersensitivity) anaphylaxis from, I:179 anemia from, I:337 aplastic anemia from, I:337 asthma from, I:380 bad breath from, I:437 birth defects from, I:490 for breast cancer, I:582 catecholamine levels with, II:677 cholestasis from, II:783–784 congenital brain defects from, II:891 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 cyanosis from, II:980 dehydration from, II:1017 for dementia, II:1026 diarrhea from, I:264, II:1066 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2244 3730 dry mouth from, II:1109 edema from, II:1134 female sexual arousal disorder and, II:1309 gender differences and, IV:2573–2574 genetic reactions to, IV:2573–2574 hallucinations from, III:1504 hemolytic anemia from, III:1579 hepatitis from, III:1607–1608 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 hirsutism from, III:1636, 1637 hives from, III:1642 hypoglycemia from, III:1734 hypothermia from, III:1753 interactions, II:1101–1104 interstitial lung diseases from, III:1773 intravenous (See Intravenous drugs) itching from, I:285 jaundice from, III:1881 kidney failure from, I:44 with kidney function tests, III:1913 labyrinthitis from, III:1935 leukocytosis from, III:1993 lichen planus from, III:1997 liver injuries from, II:816, 817 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 malingering for, III:2100 metabolism of, II:1101–1104 mineral toxicity from, III:2194 monitoring (See Drug therapy monitoring) with mood disorders, III:2217 movement disorders from, III:2221 Munchausen syndrome from, III:2257 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 myocarditis from, III:2289 myopathies from, III:2294 nausea from, IV:2325 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 nystagmus from, IV:2372 over-the-counter (See Over-thecounter drugs) overdose of (See Drug overdose) photosensitivity from, III:1715 poisoning from, IV:2643, 2644 during pregnancy, IV:2697 pulmonary eosinophilia from, II:1216 pulmonary fibrosis from, III:1773 race differences and, IV:2573–2574 resistance to (See Drug resistance) respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 screening for (See Drug testing) sick sinus syndrome from, IV:3040 sleep disorders from, IV:3088–3089 for strabismus, IV:3177 for stress, IV:3186 for stress urinary incontinence, III:2123 tolerance (See Drug tolerance) topical, dermatitis from, II:1037 toxicity (See Drug toxicity) tremor from, V:3381 vasculitis from, V:3478 wheezing from, V:3554 withdrawal from (See Substance withdrawal syndrome) Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome from, V:3574 See also Chemotherapy; specific drugs Drummond instrumentation. See Spinal instrumentation Drusen, from macular degeneration, III:2076 Dry beriberi. See Beriberi Dry drowning. See Near drowning Dry eye syndromes from eyelid diseases, II:1273 during pregnancy, IV:2697 sicca complex (See Sjögren’s syndrome) Dry gangrene, III:1393, 1394 Dry macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration Dry mouth, II:1109–1110 from brachytherapy, IV:2815 from dicyclomine, I:308, 309 salivary gland scan for, IV:2932 from Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3063–3064 from smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 SSRIs from, IV:2991 Dry pleurisy. See Pleurisy Dry socket, from tooth extraction, III:1800, V:3334 Dryexan. See Phendimetrazine Drysol. See Aluminum chloride hexadydrate DSM-IV. See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders DTaP. See Diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine DTP. See Diphtheria-tetanus-pertussis vaccine DTs. See Alcohol withdrawal delirium Dual diagnosis, with personality disorders, IV:2565 Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry for bone density testing, I:540 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1713 for osteoporosis, IV:2426, 2998 See also Bone density scan Dual photon absorptiometry, I:540 Duane’s syndrome, II:1269 DUB. See Dysfunctional uterine bleeding Dubowitz exam, for gestational age, IV:2707 Duchenne muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267, 2295, 2296 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 pulmonary fibrosis from, IV:2782 Q fever and, IV:2797 Dusting powder. See Talcum powder Dutch hereditary cerebral hemorrhage, II:695 Dutch honeysuckle. See Honeysuckle Dutch rushes. See Horsetail Dwale. See Belladonna Dwarfism achondroplasia as, I:21–22 growth hormone tests for, III:1488 kyphosis and, III:1932 pituitary, IV:2604–2607, 2605 Dwayberry. See Belladonna DXA. See Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry Dyana. See Meditation Dyazide. See Hydrochlorothiazide-triamterene Dyeberry. See Bilberry Dyer’s chamomile. See Chamomile Dyes, hair. See Hair dyes DynaCirc. See Isradipine Dynamic interpretations, in psychoanalysis, IV:2762 Dynamic training, athletic heart syndrome from, I:400 Dynapen. See Dicloxacillin Dynavision apparatus, V:3508 Dyphylline with beta blockers, I:477 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 Dyrenium. See Triamterene Dysarthria, vs. aphasia, I:333 Dysbiosis, II:855 Dyscalculia, III:1969 Dysentery amebic (See Amebiasis) with antidiarrhea drugs, I:265 from enterobacterial infections, II:1205 proctitis from, IV:2719 from shigella (See Shigellosis) Dysequilibrium, I:28 See also Balance disorders Dysfibrinogenemia, II:1321 Dysfunctional family in anorexia nervosa, I:212 conduct disorder from, II:883 Dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1111–1114 Dysgammaglobulinemia, III:1785 Dysgeusia, from brachytherapy, IV:2815 Dysgraphia, III:1969 Dyskeratosis congenita, I:337 Dyskinesia. See Movement disorders Dyslexia, II:1114–1116, III:1969, V:3508 Dyslipidemia. See Hyperlipidemia GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Dyslipoproteinemia, III:1706 Dysmenorrhea, II:1116–1118, III:2169–2170, 2171, 2172 acetaminophen for, I:19 aspirin for, I:378 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 from endometrial biopsy, II:1187 indigestion from, III:1813 from IUDs, II:912, III:1876 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 rofecoxib for, IV:2901 sitz bath for, IV:3062 therapeutic touch for, V:3282 Dysmetria, V:3395 Dysosmia, IV:3098, 3099 Dyspareunia, II:1308, III:2168, V:3469 See also Female sexual arousal disorder Dysphagia. See Deglutition disorders Dysphoria, I:486, IV:2351 Dysplasia cervical (See Cervical dysplasia) for cervical cancer, II:711 colposcopy for, II:864 fibrous, I:557 laryngeal, III:1950–1951 Dysplastic nevus syndrome, III:2096 See also Nevus Dyspnea, IV:3035–3037 from asbestosis, I:370 from asthma, I:383 from atelectasis, I:390 from atrial septal defects, I:409 from colony stimulating factors, III:1792 from congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 cyanosis from, II:980 from eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2692 electrophysiologic tests for, II:1163 from emphysema, II:1172 during exercise, III:1726 with exercise, II:1249 from fluoroquinolones, II:1345, 1346 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 from goiter, III:1470 from heart valve diseases, III:1550 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1564–1566 from hemolytic anemia, III:1579 from hyperthyroidism, III:1724 from injuries, IV:3035 from lung diseases, III:2050 nausea with, IV:2325 from nitrofurantoin, V:3449 from obesity, IV:2374 with palpitations, IV:2465 with paralysis, IV:2491 from pneumothorax, IV:2641 from respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 3731 Dyspnea aldolase and, I:100 scoliosis with, IV:2972 Ductal adenocarcinoma, pancreatic, IV:2473–2474 Ductogram, for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1324 Duke method. See Bleeding time Duke University, I:135 Duke’s method. See Bleeding time Dulcolax. See Bisadocyl Dumbcane poisoning, IV:2644 Dumdum fever. See Visceral leishmaniasis Dumoniaceae. See Red marine algae Dumping syndrome after gastrectomy, III:1399 after ulcer surgery, V:3428 from vagotomy, V:3470–3471 Dunlop’s traction, V:3357 Duodenal atresia, II:1110 from Down syndrome, II:1099, 1100 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 Duodenal cancer, II:1287 Duodenal obstruction, II:1110–1111 Duodenal transplantation, IV:2468 Duodenal ulcer. See Peptic ulcer Duodenography. See Hypotonic duodenography Duodenum, IV:2469 cancer of, II:1287 diverticulum, II:978 hypoplasia, II:1110 Dupuytren’s contracture, IV:2572 Dura mater Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and, II:951 in head injuries, III:1520 in subdural hematoma, IV:3204 Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care, III:2000 Dural ectasia, III:2115 Duramon. See Permethrin Duricef. See Cefadroxil Durie-Salmon system, for cancer staging, III:2242 Dust allergies to, I:112, 123 allergy tests for, I:123 asthma from, I:236 conjunctivitis from, II:903 extrinsic allergic alveolitis from, III:1717 interstitial lung diseases from, III:1773–1774 itching from, I:285 lung diseases from, III:2050 melioidosis from, III:2150 mycobacterial infections from, III:2276 nocardiosis from, IV:2358 occupational asthma from, IV:2386 Dyspnea from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 tests for, IV:2783 from ventricular septal defect, V:3501 from vocal cord paralysis, V:3530 Dysreflexia, autonomic, IV:3129, 3131–3132 Dysrhythmia. See Arrhythmia Dyssomnias, IV:3087–3088 Dysthymic disorder, II:1034, III:2216–2217 Dystocia, II:725, 759 See also Labor Dystonia cervical (See Torticollis) laryngeal, III:2222 movement disorders and, III:2222 oromandibular, III:2222 Dystrophia myotonica. See Myotonic dystrophy Dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa, II:1217 Dystrophin, in muscular dystrophy, III:2262 Dysuria from cystitis, II:992 from decongestants, II:1012 E E. coli. See Escherichia coli E. coli 0157:H7. See Escherichia coli E. coli non-0157. See Escherichia coli E-Mycin. See Erythromycin EAP regimen, for stomach cancer, IV:3167 Ear abnormalities of congenital, II:1124 from Edward’s syndrome, II:1136 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 surgery for, II:1124 balance and coordination tests and, I:438 bones of (See Ear ossicles) burns of, I:617 infections of (See Ear infection) injuries to, II:1122 irrigation of, II:710 neurologic examination of, IV:2352 physical examination of, IV:2593 reattachment, III:1971 surgery of (See Ear surgery) tumors of, II:1123 Ear acupuncture. See Auriculotherapy Ear canal obstruction of, I:415, II:709–711 surgery of, II:1123 3732 Ear cancer, II:1122 Ear diseases, II:1122 Ear drainage, III:1529 Ear drops, II:710 Ear examination, II:1121–1122 Ear infection with breastfeeding, III:1942 vs. bruxism, I:609 cleft lip and palate and, II:819 dizziness from, II:1095 with Down syndrome, II:1099 from enterobacteriaceae, II:1204 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 with irrigation, II:710 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 mastoidectomy for, III:2133 with mastoiditis, III:2134–2135 with measles, III:2139 of the middle ear (See Otitis media) with nasal packing, IV:2314 orbital and periorbital cellulitis from, IV:2407 otoscopy for, II:1121 penicillin for, IV:2527 from perforated eardrum, IV:2534, 2535 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 from Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3063 surgery for, II:1123 from X-linked agammaglobulinemia, V:3585 Ear ossicles, I:414 Ear surgery, II:1122–1124 for dizziness, II:1095 for labyrinthitis, III:1935 of mastoid bone, III:2133 for mastoiditis, III:2135 for otitis media with effusion, III:2303–2305 Ear wax. See Cerumen Earache, after T & A, V:3326 Eardrum. See Tympanic membrane Earlens, III:1526 Early-onset Alzheimer’s disease. See Alzheimer’s disease Early onset emphysema. See Emphysema Earwax. See Cerumen Eastern equine encephalitis, I:347 EAT. See Eating Attitudes Test Eating with braces, III:2107 leukocytosis from, III:1993 with malocclusion, III:2106 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 See also Eating disorders Eating Attitudes Test, I:212 Eating behavior. See Feeding behavior Eating Disorder Inventory, I:212 Eating disorders as addiction, I:50 amenorrhea from, I:147 binge (See Binge eating disorder) in children, II:762 cognitive therapy for, II:840 dehydration from, II:1017 family therapy for, II:1288 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 hypokalemia from, III:1740 malnutrition from, III:2104 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388 pica, IV:2595–2596 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 self help groups for, III:1485 self mutilation with, IV:2993 SSRIs for, IV:2990 See also Bulimia; specific disorders EB. See Epidermolysis bullosa Ebola hemorrhagic fever, III:1590, 1822 Ebstein’s anomaly, II:900, V:3574 EBV. See Epstein-Barr virus Ecchymoses. See Contusions ECG. See Electrocardiography Echinacea, II:1125–1127 for allergies, I:121 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for folliculitis, II:1352 for gastritis, III:1407 for genital herpes, III:1443 for influenza, III:1835 for laryngitis, III:1958 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253–2254 for mumps, III:2256 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for otitis media, IV:2435 for PID, IV:2523 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for shingles, IV:3032 for sinusitis, IV:3059 for strep throat, IV:3179 for tonsillitis, V:3328 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 Echinococcosis, II:1127–1129, 1128f, III:2017 Echinococcus granulosus, II:1127, II:1128 Echocardiography, II:1129–1130 for aortic valve insufficiency, I:328 for atherosclerosis, I:394, 395 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:407 for atrial septal defects, I:409 for cardiac tamponade, II:661 vs. chest x-ray, II:747 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 EcoG. See Electrocochleograph Econazole, for fungal infections, I:270 ECP. See Eosinophil cationic protein ECRP. See Endoscopy Ecstasy. See MDMA ECT. See Electroconvulsive therapy Ecthyma, from impetigo, III:1802 Ectopia lentis, III:2115–2116 Ectopic heart beats, II:1148 Ectopic parathyroid, IV:2498 Ectopic pregnancy, II:1130–1133, 1274f amylase tests for, I:160 from chlamydial pneumoniae, IV:2540 culpocentesis for, IV:2490 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 with gonorrhea, III:1472, 1474 human chorionic gonadotropin test and, III:1680 inversion rupture of, IV:2383, 2384–2385 IUDs with, III:1877 laparoscopy for, III:1947 laser surgery for, III:1960 mifepristone and, III:2186 from PID, IV:2521 prenatal ultrasonography for, IV:2525 salpingectomy for, IV:2937 after tubal ligation, V:3398 vaginal bleeding from, III:2204 from in vitro fertilization, III:1810 Ectromelia, II:887 Ectropion, II:1271 Eczema, II:1037 with antiacne agents, I:228 with asthma, I:381 vs. atopic dermatitis, I:403 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 vs. cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976 folliculitis with, II:1351 vs. fungal infections, III:1929 itching from, III:1874 vs. lice, III:1995 vs. Paget’s disease of the breast, IV:2457–2458 with penicillins, IV:2528 tests for, I:123 therapeutic baths for, V:3280–3281 Edecrin. See Ethacrynic acid Edema, II:1133–1136, 1134 from acute kidney failure, I:44 from antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 antidiuretic hormone test for, I:266 from APSGN, I:48 from beriberi, I:470, IV:3161 from calcium channel blockers, II:628 from cardiac tamponade, II:660 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 cerebral (See Cerebral edema) from chronic kidney failure, II:807 from complement deficiencies, II:874 from congestive cardiomyopathy, II:896 from dialysis, II:1061 diuretics for, II:1088 from eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2692 from epoetin, II:645 from escherichia coli, III:1580 from fluoroquinolones, II:1345, 1346 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 from glomerulonephritis, III:1462 from heart failure, III:1537 from heart valve repair, III:1550 from herniated disk, III:1628 immobilization and, III:1782 from kidney failure, I:44, II:807 leeches for, III:1971 of the lymphatic system, III:2066–2067 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 from minoxidil, III:2203 from near drowning, IV:2327 from nephritis, IV:2333 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 paracentesis for, IV:2489 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747 from reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2840 restrictive cardiomyopathy from, IV:2873 from Reye’s syndrome, IV:2895 from surgery, III:1427 from tricuspid valve insufficiency, V:3389 from varicose veins, V:3476 See also Lymphedema Edetate calcium disodium for heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 for lead poisoning, III:1967 EDI. See Eating Disorder Inventory EDMD. See Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy Edrophonium for myasthenia gravis, II:794, III:2274 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 EDS. See Ehlers-Danlos syndrome EDTA. See Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid EDTA calcium. See Edetate calcium disodium Education and training about pica, IV:2596 about syphilis, IV:3230 athletic (See Athletic training) in biofeedback, I:485 bladder (See Bladder training) bowel (See Bowel training) 3733 Educational training for congenital heart disease, II:901 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 for coronary heart disease, II:930 Doppler (See Doppler echocardiography) for dyspnea, IV:3036 vs. electrophysiologic tests, II:1163 for endocarditis, II:1184 exercise (See Exercise echocardiography) for heart failure, III:1538 for heart murmurs, III:1541 for heart surgery, III:1544 for heart valve diseases, V:3474 for heart valve repair, III:1550 for heart valve replacement, III:1551 from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 for Marfan syndrome, III:2118 for mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206 for mitral valve prolapse, III:2208 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 for myocardial ischemia, III:1869 for myocarditis, III:2289 for myxoma, III:2306 with pericardiocentesis, IV:2536–2537 for pericarditis, IV:2539 for Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597 for pulmonary valve insufficiency, IV:2787 for pulmonary valve stenosis, IV:2788 for restrictive cardiomyopathy, IV:2872 for sarcomas, IV:2944 for TIA, V:3372 transesophageal (See Transesophageal echocardiography) for transposition of the great arteries, V:3374 for tricuspid valve insufficiency, V:3389 for tricuspid valve stenosis, V:3390 Valsalva maneuver with, V:3471 for ventricular septal defect, V:3501 Echolalia with catatonia, II:676 from Tourette syndrome, V:3342 Echopraxia with catatonia, II:676 from Tourette syndrome, V:3342 Echovirus immunologic deficiency syndromes and, III:1790 laryngitis from, III:1957 Echthiophate, for glaucoma, II:794 Eclampsia, IV:2382, 2385, IV:2692–2694 magnesium for, III:2197 stillbirth from, IV:3163 Educational training for carbuncle, I:537 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 childbirth, II:761 for furunculosis, I:537 for minority health, III:2201 in reflexology, IV:2845 for substance abuse prevention, IV:3210 in yoga, V:3594, 3597 Edward Bach Foundation, II:1341 Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136–1137 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 syndactyly with, IV:2661 EEG. See Electroencephalography Efavirenz, skin rash from, I:304 Efavirin, for AIDS, I:80 Effusion, middle ear, IV:2433 Eflornithine, for protozoan infections, I:298 EFM. See Electronic fetal monitoring Efudex. See 5-flourouracil EGD. See Esophagogastroduodenoscopy Egg (Human), II:1130 Eggs (Food) allergy to, III:1402, V:3466 Salmonella in, II:1353 vitamin B6 in, V:3513 Egyptian ophthalmia. See Trachoma Egyptian senna. See Senna Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, II:1137–1142 aortic dissection with, I:327 cerebral aneurysm from, II:697 Ehrlichia, II:1142 Ehrlichia chaffeensis, II:1142 Ehrlichia equi, II:1142 Ehrlichia phagocytophilia, II:1142 Ehrlichiosis, II:1142–1143 Eighth cranial nerve disease, I:150 Eikenella corrodens in clenched fist injury, II:821 human bite infections from, III:1677 Einstein, Albert, on vegetarianism, V:3485 Ejaculation inability (See Ejaculatory incompetence) premature (See Premature ejaculation) for prostatitis, IV:2741 retrograde (See Retrograde ejaculation) Ejaculatory incompetence, IV:3015 Ejection fraction in cardiac catheterization, II:658 in heart failure, III:1539 in heart performance, III:2233–2234 Ekbom syndrome. See Restless legs syndrome EKC. See Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis 3734 EKG. See Electrocardiography Elastase, in emphysema, II:809 Elastic bandages for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for heel spurs, III:1563 after liposuction, III:2010 after lumpectomy, III:2037 for mastectomy, III:2130 for skin grafts, IV:3071 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 Elastic bands, for motion sickness, III:2219 Elastic stockings for lymphedema, III:2067 for orthostatic hypotension, IV:2411 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 Elastic support after arthrography, I:360 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for breast reduction, I:591 for deep vein thrombosis, II:1014 for filariasis, II:1331 Elastic tissue, in temporal arteritis, V:3247 Elastin in arteriovenous malformations, I:357 in emphysema, II:809 Elavil. See Amitriptyline Elbow bursitis of, I:620 gout in, III:1479 injuries, V:3252 Elbow joint arthroplasty for, I:361 arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 arthroscopy for, I:364 with juvenile arthritis, III:1893 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1889 Eldepryl. See Selegeline Elderflower, for influenza, III:1835 Elderly caffeine and, II:625 central nervous system depressants for, II:689 decongestants in, II:1011 delirium in, II:1020 digital rectal examinations of, IV:2833 drug metabolism in, II:1102 emphysema in, II:809 Feldenkrais method for, II:1304 food poisoning in, II:1353, 1355, 1356 fractures in, II:1363, 1365–1366 ginkgo for, III:1453 health (See Senior’s health) Korean ginseng for, III:1455 music therapy for, III:2270–2271 poisoning and, IV:2643 presbyosmia in, IV:3099 with toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3346 tracheotomy and, V:3355 tuberculosis and, V:3405–3406 typhoid and, V:3422 Elderly abuse, I:17, 18 Elecampane for emphysema, II:1175 for pleurisy, IV:2632 Electric burns, I:619 Electric countershock. See Defibrillation Electric fields effects from MRI, III:2082 in hemoglobin electrophoresis, III:1574, 1575 Electric shock in coronary artery bypass grafting, II:926 defibrillation as, II:1015 for heart attacks, III:1533 with implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, III:1803 Electric shock injuries, II:1143–1144 fasciotomy for, II:1292 ventricular fibrillation from, V:3499 Electric stimulation in bone growth stimulation, I:546 of the brain, II:1145–1147 from cochlear implants, II:838 for fractures, II:1365 for the heart, II:1164 for herniated disk, III:1630 for hypoglycemia, III:1736 implantable, I:546 for motion sickness, III:2219 for muscle contraction, IV:3130 nerve (See Electrical nerve stimulation) for scoliosis, IV:2972 Electrical activity in brain (See Brain mapping) evoked potential studies for, II:1248 of the heart, I:614 (See also Cardiac mapping) ambulatory electrocardiography for, III:1653 in athletic heart syndrome, I:400 electrophysiologic tests for, II:1163–1166 in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3574 muscular, II:1159 Electrical cautery, for anal warts, I:172 Electrical energy in catheter ablation, II:679–680 impedance phlebography for, III:1800 Electrical impulses from cochlear implants, II:838 in the heart, II:1164, 1165 in movement disorders, III:2221–2222 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for hyperphosphatemia, II:1158 hypertension and, III:1722 for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 for hypokalemia, III:1740 for hypothermia, III:1754 for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, III:1803 for ischemia, III:1869 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 in men’s health, III:2166 for mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 for muscular dystrophy, III:2265 for myocarditis, III:2289 for near drowning, IV:2327 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 for orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 for pacemaker, IV:2454 for palpitations, IV:2465 for paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, IV:2505 with pericardiocentesis, IV:2537 for pericarditis, IV:2539 for pneumothorax, IV:2642 for polysomnography, IV:2669 for prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2725 prolonged QT syndrome and, IV:2724 with pulmonary artery catheterization, IV:2777 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2780 for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785 for pulmonary valve insufficiency, IV:2787 for pulmonary valve stenosis, IV:2788 for secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 with sedation, IV:2984 for sick sinus syndrome, IV:3040 after snake bites, I:500 for spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 for Sydenham’s chorea, IV:3223 vs. technetium heart scan, V:3246 before thoracic surgery, V:3288 for transposition of the great arteries, V:3374 with urinary diversion, V:3452 for ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 with ventricular assist devices, V:3498 for ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 for ventricular fibrillation, V:3500 for ventricular septal defect, V:3501 for ventricular tachycardia, V:3504 for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3574 Electrocautery. See Electrocoagulation Electrochemotherapy. See Chemotherapy GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Electrocoagulation for anal warts, I:172 for cervicitis, II:723 for papillomavirus, IV:2542 for polyps, I:562, 563 for rosacea, IV:2918 for tubal ligation, V:3397 for warts, V:3549 Electrocochleograph, III:2152 Electroconvulsive therapy, II:1149–1151 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for catatonia, II:677 catecholamines levels with, II:678 for dementia, II:1026 for depression, II:1035 for mood disorders, III:2217 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 Electrocution. See Electric shock injuries Electrodermal tests, for allergies, I:118 Electrodesiccation for angiomas, I:495, 496 for non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3067 Electroencephalograph biofeedback, I:484 Electroencephalography, II:1151–1153 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:137 for barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 for beriberi, I:470 for brain tumor, I:571 for cerebral aneurysm, II:699 for cocaine addiction, II:833 for congenital brain defects, II:891 for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:951, 953 for death, II:1006 for delirium, II:1022 for dissociative disorders, II:1087 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 for encephalitis, II:1178 for head injuries, III:1521 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 for polysomnography, IV:2669 for subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3200 Electrofulguration, for bladder cancer, I:508 Electrolysis for hirsutism, III:1637 for moles, III:2211 Electrolyte disorders, II:1153–1156 from anorexia nervosa, I:212 from erythrodermic psoriasis, IV:2756 Electrolyte replacement fluids. See Oral rehydration solutions Electrolytes in Addison’s disease, I:53 for burns, I:618 for colostomy, II:863 3735 Electrolytes in muscle spasms and cramps, III:2260 Electrical nerve stimulation, II:1144–1145 for dysmenorrhea, III:2172 for fractures, II:1361 for headache, III:1524 muscular (See Electromyography) for neuralgia, IV:2340 for pain, IV:2460 for pain management, IV:2463 for post-concussion syndrome, IV:2679 for TMJ, V:3250 Electroacupuncture. See Acupuncture Electrocardiogram. See Electrocardiography Electrocardiography, II:1147–1149 ambulatory (See Ambulatory electrocardiography) vs. ambulatory electrocardiography, III:1653 for aneurysmectomy, I:193 for angina pectoris, I:195 for anorexia nervosa, I:212 for aortic coarctation, II:830 for aortic valve insufficiency, I:328 for aortic valve stenosis, I:330 for arrhythmias, I:353 after atherectomy, I:393 for atherosclerosis, I:394 for athletic heart syndrome, I:400 for atrial ectopic beats, I:406 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:407 for atrial septal defects, I:409 with balloon valvuloplasty, I:443 with bowel resection, I:564 for bundle branch block, I:614 with cardiac blood pool scan, II:655 in cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 with carotid sinus massage, II:667 for CO poisoning, II:652 for colostomy, II:862 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 COPD and, II:810 for cor pulmonale, II:917 for coronary heart disease, II:930 with defibrillation, II:1015–1016 for delirium, II:1022 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1163 for embolism, I:355, II:1170 for emphysema, II:1173 for Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 for heart attacks, III:1533 with heart biopsy, III:2287 for heart block, III:1537 for heart failure, III:1538 for heart valve diseases, V:3474 for heart valve replacement, III:1551 in homeostasis monitoring, III:2000 for hyperkalemia, III:1705 Electrolytes for constipation, II:906 in dehydration, II:1017 in E. coli infections, II:1236 in enemas, II:1200 in food poisoning, II:1355 in gastroenteritis, III:1409 for hemodialysis, I:45 imbalance of (See Electrolyte disorders) in mushroom poisoning, III:2268 normal ranges for, II:1158 for rotaviruses, IV:2922 tests of, II:1157–1159 Electromagnetic energy, acupressure and, I:39 Electromagnetic fields in bone growth stimulation, I:546 brain tumors and, I:571 therapy for osteoarthritis, IV:2415 Electromagnetic radiation, I:363 Electromyogram. See Electromyography Electromyographic biofeedback. See Biofeedback Electromyography, II:1159–1161 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 for autoimmune diseases, I:424 for botulism, I:561 for carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668 for cervical disk disease, II:718 for cervical spondylosis, II:721 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1057 for dyspnea, IV:3036 external sphincter, II:1255–1256 for facial paralysis, I:462 for Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 for herniated disk, III:1628 in MUGA scans, III:2233 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 for muscular dystrophy, III:2265 for myasthenia gravis, III:2273 for myopathies, III:2295 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 for paralysis, IV:2492 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2553 for polymyositis, IV:2667 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2870 for sciatica, IV:2964 for spinal stenosis, IV:3136 for torticollis, V:3340 of the urinary sphincter, II:1255–1256 Electron beam therapy. See Radiation therapy Electronic counting, of platelets, IV:2624–2625 Electronic fetal monitoring, II:1161–1163, 1161f 3736 with NST and CST, I:221 with prematurity, IV:2707 Electronic fluency aids, IV:3200 Electronic monitoring, infant, IV:3215 Electronystagmography for dizziness, II:1095 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 Electrooculography, IV:2669 Electrophoresis for common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 hemoglobin (See Hemoglobin electrophoresis) for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for immunologic diseases, III:1786 for lipoproteins test, III:2008 protein (See Protein electrophoresis) serum protein, III:1788 in Western blot test, I:82–83 Electrophysiologic tests for arrhythmias, I:353 of heart, II:1163–1166 for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, III:1803 for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 Electroretinography for retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2881 vitamin A deficiency and, V:3512 Electroshock. See Electric shock Electrosurgery for genital warts, III:1445 for skin lesion removal, IV:3073 Elephangiasis. See Elephantiasis Elephant leg. See Elephantiasis Elephantiasis, II:1166–1169, 1167, II:1330, 1331 lymphedema from, III:2067 from lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071 lymphography for, III:2066 Eleuthero ginseng. See Siberian ginseng Eleuthrococcus senticosus. See Siberian ginseng Elevated position with immobilization, III:1782 for premature labor, IV:2701 for shock, IV:3034 for sports injuries, IV:3146 ELF regimen, for stomach cancer, IV:3167 ELISA. See Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay Elliptocytosis, splenectomy for, IV:3138 Ellis, Albert, II:839 EM. See Erythema migrans Embolectomy, II:1171 Embolism, I:354–356, II:1169–1172, 1170 amputation from, I:157, 158 from angioplasty, I:202 for arteriovenous malformations, I:330 from balloon valvuloplasty, I:443 from blood clots, I:407 from cardiac catheterization, II:657 from endocarditis, II:1183 gas (See Gas embolism) from myxoma, III:2306 from pacemaker implantation, IV:2454 peripheral vascular disease from, IV:2555 pulmonary (See Pulmonary embolism) renal artery occlusion from, IV:2855 retinal artery occlusion from, IV:2875 from thoracic surgery, V:3289 Embolization for angiomas, I:495–496 endovascular (See Endovascular embolization) renal artery, III:1911 uterine artery, III:1760 Embryo in ectopic pregnancy, II:1131 retinoic acid for, V:3512 in in vitro fertilization, III:1808–1809 Embryonal carcinomas, V:3256 Emergency contraception, I:9–10, IV:2819 Emergency medical services for amputation, I:158 aneurysmectomy as, I:193 CPR and, II:662, 664 for croup, II:960 defibrillation availability, II:1015 for electric shock injuries, II:1144 fasciotomy as, II:1292 for frostbite, II:1371 for heat stress disorders, III:1557–1558 for hypothermia, III:1754 for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 for near drowning, IV:2327 for poisoning, IV:2644 from traumatic amputations, V:3377 tube compression as, V:3399–3400 Emergency treatment for accidental falls, IV:2999 CPR for, II:661–665 for drug overdose, II:1105 for fractures, II:1365 for intussusception, III:1856 neurologic examination for, IV:2352 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 tracheotomy for, V:3353 in wilderness medicine, V:3560–3561 Emerin, in muscular dystrophy, III:2262 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 cor pulmonale with, II:917 cough from, II:941 with cough suppressants, II:943, 944 from cutis laxa, II:978 from cystic fibrosis, II:984 gallbladder, II:779 with guaifenesin, II:1254 with lung perfusion and ventilation scans, III:2052 lung transplantation for, III:2054 with methadone, III:2182 with motion sickness, III:2219 with opioid analgesics, I:177 oxygen therapy for, III:1837 pneumothorax from, IV:2641 protein electrophoresis and, IV:2748 pulmonary hypertension from, IV:2785 from smoking, III:2050, 2051, IV:3104 surgery for, III:2053, 2054 tests for, IV:2783 wheezing from, V:3554 Empress of herbs. See Dong quai Empyema, II:1175–1177 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 chest drainage therapy for, II:743 from cholecystitis, II:779 from CNS infections, II:690 with liver biopsy, III:2017 from pleurisy, IV:2632 thoracoscopy for, V:3290 Empyema thoracis, II:1175 EMS. See Emergency medical services Enalapril with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 with diuretics, II:1090 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypertension, I:203, 279–281 race differences and, IV:2573 with terazosin, I:131 Enbrel. See Entanercept; Etanercept Encephalitis, II:1177–1180 from adenoviruses, I:57 amnesia from, I:152 antibiotics for, I:241 aphasia from, I:333 catatonia from, II:676 cerebrospinal fluid analysis for, II:706 from chickenpox, II:750 from cryptococcosis, II:965 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 from diethylcarbamazine, II:1331 electroencephalography for, II:1151 from fluke infection, II:1343 galactorrhea from, III:1375 from genital herpes, IV:2541 from human parvovirus B19, II:1329 Japanese (See Japanese encephalitis) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 learning disorders from, III:1969 from measles, III:2139, IV:3200 mental retardation from, III:2175 from mumps, III:2255 vs. Reye’s syndrome, IV:2895 with RMSF, IV:2910 from shigellosis, IV:3028 from shingles, IV:3033 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 from TORCH syndrome, V:3338 with toxoplasmosis, V:3349 from trichinosis, V:3386 from typhus, V:3423 See also Arboviruses Encephalocele, II:890 Encephalomyelitis, II:1177 Encephalopathic syndrome, IV:2515–2516 Encephalopathy from drug overdose, II:1104 from electrolyte disorders, II:1156 liver (See Liver encephalopathy) movement disorders from, III:2221 seizures from, IV:2986 spongiform (See Spongiform encephalopathy) static (See Cerebral palsy) Encounter groups vs. Gestalt therapy, III:1446 in human potential movement, III:1677 End colostomy. See Colostomy End-stage heart failure. See Heart failure End-stage renal disease. See Chronic kidney failure Endarterectomy, II:1180–1182, 1181f, III:1870 Endarteritis, IV:2875 Endemic syphilis. See Bejel Endemic typhus, V:3423–3424 Endocardial resection. See Myocardial resection Endocarditis, II:1182–1185 bacterial (See Bacterial endocarditis) blood culture for, I:522 from body piercing, IV:2599 brain abscess from, I:566 congenital heart diseases and, II:902 heart valve damage from, III:1549 infective (See Infective endocarditis) from listeriosis, III:2014 from Marfan syndrome, III:2115 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 urinalysis for, V:3445 with ventricular septal defect, V:3501 Endocardium biopsy of, III:1547–1548, 2290 infection of, II:1182–1185 Endocrine ascites. See Ascites 3737 Endocrine ascites Emerson, Ralph Waldo, as vegetarian, V:3485 Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267 Emesis. See Vomiting Emetic weed. See Lobelia Emetine, for amebiasis, I:145 EMF. See Electronic fetal monitoring EMG. See Electromyography Eminase. See Anistreplase EMLA cream, for circumcision, II:814 EMO. See Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation Emollient laxatives, III:1964 Emotional abuse, I:16–17 Emotional disorders Bender-Gestalt test for, I:465 from child abuse, II:754, 756 culture-fair tests for, II:969 from enterostomies, II:1211 group therapy for, III:1485 from hysterectomy, III:1763 in hysteria, III:1764 marriage counseling for, III:2122 in men, III:2168 with opioid analgesics, I:177 plastic surgery and, IV:2620–2622 with PMS, IV:2710 from postconcussion syndrome, III:1521 with self mutilation, IV:2994 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 from thyroid crisis, III:1724 Emotions in acrocyanosis, I:31 art therapy and, I:367–368 in child abuse, II:755 in children, II:763 corticotropin levels and, I:65 indigestion from, III:1813 with life support, III:2001 with LSD, III:2073 music therapy and, III:2270 in pain, IV:2459 physical allergy from, IV:2592 Empathy, III:1677 EMPD. See Paget’s disease of the breast Emphysema, II:809–812, II:1172–1175 aneurysmectomy and, I:193 with anti-insomnia agents, I:283 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 with barbiturates, I:446 with benzodiazepines, I:467 with beta blockers, I:476 from black lung disease, I:506 breathing capacity and, III:1999 bronchodilators for, I:600 chest drainage therapy for, II:743 chest x-ray for, II:747 choking from, II:772 congenital lobar, II:893–894 Endocrine diseases Endocrine diseases amenorrhea from, I:147, III:2169 with amyloidosis, I:162 anxiety from, I:318 gynecomastia from, III:1498 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 infertility from, III:1832 myopathies from, III:2294–2295 polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2662–2663 psychosis from, IV:2765–2766 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 tumors from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 neuroendocrine tumors, IV:2343 urinalysis for, V:3443, 3446 Endocrine glands, hypopituitarism and, III:1746 Endocrine pancreatic cancer, IV:2471–2473, 2473–2477 Endocrine system, III:2237, V:3282 Endodontic treatment. See Root canal therapy Endolymph, in Meniere’s disease, III:2151 Endometrial ablation for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1114 for uterine fibroids, III:1761 Endometrial biopsy, II:1186–1187, 1187f, II:1189 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 for menstrual disorders, III:2170 for postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2680 Endometrial cancer, II:1188–1192, 1189f bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy for, IV:2937 biopsy for (See Endometrial biopsy) with hormone replacement therapy, III:2160, 2163 menorrhagia from, II:1112 Norplant for, II:1032 from obesity, IV:2373, 2378 pap smear for, IV:2484 See also Uterine cancer Endometrial hyperplasia, II:1188, III:1760 Endometrial implants. See Endometriosis Endometrial polyps D & C for, II:1075 vs. dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 menorrhagia from, II:1112, III:2170 Endometrial resection, III:1761 Endometriosis, II:1192–1195 dysmenorrhea from, III:2170 ectopic pregnancy from, II:1131 3738 hysterectomy for, III:1760 infertility and, III:1808, 1809, 1828, 1832 with infertility drugs, III:1831 laparoscopic diagnosis, III:1947 laparoscopy for, III:1949 menorrhagia from, II:1112 oral contraceptives and, IV:2402 salpingo-oophorectomy for, IV:2938 sexual dysfunctions from, II:1308, IV:3016 from vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Endometritis, IV:2521 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from cesarean section, II:726 from premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 Endometrium, II:1188 biopsy of (See Endometrial biopsy) in dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 hysterosonography for, III:1768 in PMS, IV:2710 tests for, II:1186–1187 Endophthalmitis from cataract surgery, II:672 from vitrectomy, V:3528 Endorectal ultrasonography, II:1195–1196, IV:2830 Endorphins dysmenorrhea and, II:1118 menopause and, III:2160 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, II:1196–1198, III:1386 for cholangitis, II:775 for cholestasis, II:785 with endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1198 for gallstones, III:1389 for pancreatectomy, IV:2469 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2475 for pancreatitis, IV:2480 Endoscopic retrograde sphincterotomy. See Endoscopic sphincterotomy Endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1198–1199 Endoscopic therapy, for bleeding varices, I:517 Endoscopic ultrasonography, II:1240, IV:2472, 2475 Endoscopy, III:1426 for achalasia, I:20 for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 for cholangitis, II:775 for Crohn’s disease, II:958 for diarrhea, II:1066 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 for duodenal ulcer, III:1406 for dyspepsia, II:1119 endocarditis from, II:1183 for esophageal cancer, II:1240, 1241 for esophageal function, II:1242 for esophageal varices, I:516, 517, IV:2969 (See also Esophagogastroduodenoscopy) FOBT and, II:1302, 1303 for foreign object removal, II:1359 for gastrectomy, III:1398 for gastric emptying disorders, III:1402 for gastritis, III:1406 for gastrostomy, III:1411 vs. GI bleeding studies, III:1449 for Helicobacter pylori, III:1566 for hernias, III:1627 for hiatal hernias (See Upper GI series) for indigestion, III:1814–1815 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 for laryngeal cancer, III:1951 in laryngoscopy, III:1958 for Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 with nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 for neuroendocrine tumors, IV:2342 for roundworm infections, IV:2924 sinus, for smelling disorders, IV:3100 with small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 for stomach cancer, IV:3165–3166 for stomach ulcer, III:1406, V:3433 before thoracic surgery, V:3288 for ulcerative colitis, V:3430 upper (See Esophagogastroduodenoscopy) See also Colonoscopy; Laryngoscopy; Thoracoscopy Endothelial cells. See Endothelium Endothelial growth factor inhibitors, III:1899 Endothelin-3 gene, III:1635 Endothelin-B receptor gene, III:1635 Endothelin converting enzyme, III:1635 Endothelium in atherosclerosis, I:393 frostbite damage, II:1371 Endotoxins, septic shock from, IV:3005 Endotracheal tube in life support, III:1999 with lung biopsy, III:2041 with mediastinoscopy, III:2143 for near drowning, IV:2327 for vocal cord paralysis, V:3531 Endovaginal ultrasonography. See Transvaginal ultrasonography Endovascular embolization, IV:3203 Enduron. See Thiazide diuretics Enema, II:1199–1201, 1200f barium (See Barium enema) for botulism, I:562 before bowel resection, I:564 in bowel training, I:565 with colonoscopy, II:858 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for malnutrition, III:2105 with metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 mineral supplements and, III:2196 for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 vs. nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 necrotizing enterocolitis from, IV:2329 for pancreatectomy, IV:2470 for starvation, IV:3162 for toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3345–3346 See also Parenteral nutrition Enteric fever. See Paratyphoid fever Enteritis, upper GI series for, V:3438 Entero-lavage. See Colonic irrigation Enterobacter aminoglycosides for, I:150 cultures for, V:3579 cystitis from, II:992 urine culture for, V:3457 Enterobacter aerogenes, IV:2431 Enterobacteriaceae brain abscess from, I:566 infections from, II:1204–1207 yersiniosis from, V:3592 Enterobacterial infections, II:1204–1207 Enterobiasis, I:273, 275, II:1207–1209 Enterobius vermicularis, II:1207 Enterococcus, cultures for, V:3579 Enterocolitis necrotizing (See Necrotizing enterocolitis) from yersiniosis, V:3592 Enterohemolysin, II:1236 Enterohemorrahagic escheresia coli. See Escherichia coli Enteroinvasive escheresia coli. See Escherichia coli Enteropathogenic escheresia coli. See Escherichia coli Enterostomy, II:1209–1211 Enterotoxigenic escheresia coli. See Escherichia coli Enterotoxins, from E. coli, II:1236 Enterotoxogenic escheresia coli. See Escherichia coli Enterovirus, II:1211–1213 immunologic deficiency syndromes and, III:1790 polioviruses as, IV:2648 Taiwanese outbreak, III:1506 Entropion, II:1271 Enucleation, for eye cancer, II:1260–1261 Enuresis. See Bed-wetting Environment anxiety from, I:319 in chronic leukemia, III:1991 cleft lip and palate from, II:819–820 for colon cancer, II:849 E. coli from, II:1235 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Fanconi’s syndrome from, II:1290 in Hartnup disease, III:1511 mental retardation from, III:2174 neuralgia from, IV:2339 sudden infant death syndrome and, IV:3213 Environmental illness. See Multiple chemical sensitivity Environmental pressure, gas embolism from, II:1169 Environmental protection, V:3487–3488 Environmental Protection Agency, I:472 Environmental toxins cancer from, II:633, 637 cluster headache from, II:824 congenital amputation from, II:887 congenital heart diseases from, II:900 cough from, II:941 E.coli from, II:1235, 1236 Fanconi’s syndrome from, II:1290, 1291 fish and shellfish poisoning from, II:1334, 1335 food poisoning from, II:1353 glomerulonephritis from, III:1461 hypoglycemia from, III:1735 nasal trauma from, IV:2317, 2318 smoking and, I:50 Enzyme assays for hepatitis B, III:1601 for hepatitis C, III:1604 for hepatitis D, III:1606 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 Enzyme deficiency, II:885 Enzyme inhibitors, IV:2502 Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for AIDS, I:79–80, 82, 83, 86 for allergies, I:118 for E. coli, II:1236, 1237 for giardia, III:1451 for gonorrhea, III:1472, 1473 for hepatitis C, III:1611 for rotaviruses, IV:2922 for syphilis, IV:3229 Enzyme replacement therapy for Fabry’s disease, III:2005 for Gaucher’s disease, III:1413, 2005 for lipoidosis, III:2003 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 for peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 Enzyme therapy, II:1214–1217 for autoimmune diseases, I:424 for pancreatitis, IV:2481 Enzymes, II:1214–1215 in cellulitis, II:684 in debridement, II:1008 digestive (See Digestive enzymes) in leeches, III:1971 3739 Enzymes for colostomy, II:862 before endorectal ultrasonography, II:1195 for fecal incontinence, II:1301 hypocalcemia from, III:1731–1732 hypokalemia from, III:1739 for intravenous urography, III:1855 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 phosphate toxicity from, III:2194 poisoning from, IV:2585, 2586 for proctitis, IV:2719 for prostate biopsy, IV:2727 for prostate ultrasound, IV:2736 with pyloroplasty, IV:2792 for retrograde cystography, IV:2892 for retrograde ureteropyelography, IV:2894 stool fats and, IV:3173 Energy fields, therapeutic touch and, V:3282, 3283 Energy medicine, IV:2799 Energy metabolism aldolase and, I:99 in muscle spasms and cramps, III:2260 vitamin B6 and, V:3514 Enflurane, for general anesthesia, I:186 English bog myrtle. See Bayberry English ivy poisoning, IV:2644 English lavender. See Lavender The English Physician Enlarged (Culpeper), III:1617 English plantain. See Plantain Enlarged prostate. See Benign prostatic hypertrophy Enlarged spleen. See Splenomegaly Enolase, in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 Enophthalmos, tarsorrhaphy for, V:3243 Enoxacin for bacterial infections, II:1344–1345 nalidixic acid and, V:3448 Entacapone, for Parkinson disease, I:296 Entamoeba dispar, I:143 Entamoeba histolytica abscess from, I:13 amebiasis from, I:143, 144 travelers diarrhea from, V:3379 Entanercept, for rheumatoid arthritis, I:307 Enteral nutrition, IV:2577, V:3400–3402, 3401 for acidosis, III:2179 cholestasis from, II:783 enterostomy for, II:1210 for food poisoning, II:1356 for ileus, III:1780 for infant botulism, I:561 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 Enzymes in lipoidosis, III:2003 magnesium and, III:2078 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 in osteoarthritis, IV:2412 vitamin B6 and, V:3513 See also specific enzymes Eosinophil cationic protein, I:118 Eosinophilia ABPA and, I:107 from elephantiasis, II:1167 Eosinophilic granulomas, III:1638 Eosinophils in complete blood count, I:522 in pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 in schistosomiasis, IV:2955 WBC count and differential for, V:3556, 3557 EP study. See Electrophysiologic tests EPA. See Environmental Protection Agency Ependymal tumors. See Ependymomas Ependymomas, I:570 Ephedra for allergies, I:121 ischemia and, III:1871 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for sinusitis, IV:3059 for weight loss, IV:2376 Ephedra sinica. See Ephedra Ephedrine, II:691 atrial ectopic beats from, I:406 as bronchodilator, I:601 Ephedrine sulfate, I:275 Ephelides, III:1715 Epicanthal folds, with Down syndrome, II:1099 Epicondylitis. See Tennis elbow Epicurus, as vegetarian, V:3485 Epidemic impetigo. See Impetigo Epidemic keratoconjunctivitis, I:57, 58 Epidemic non-A, non-B hepatitis. See Hepatitis E Epidemic parotitis. See Mumps Epidemic pleurodynia, II:1212 Epidemic typhus, V:3423–3424 Epidemics from anthrax, I:224 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:952 of influenza, III:1834 Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 of Legionnaires’ disease, III:1972–1973 of meningitis, III:2154 mump, III:2255–2256 of plague, IV:2614 of relapsing fever, IV:2853 from smallpox, IV:3096 Epidermis in burns, I:617 Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma of, II:975, 976 3740 with moles, III:2210 Epidermolysis bullosa, II:1217–1218 Epidermolytic toxins. See Exfoliatins Epidermophyton, I:270 Epidermophyton floccosum, I:398 Epididymectomy, II:1219 Epididymitis, II:1218–1219, III:2167 scrotal nuclear medicine scan for, IV:2973 ultrasound for, IV:2974 from vasectomy, V:3482 Epidural anesthesia, I:190 for childbirth, II:760 for herniated disk, III:1628 for sciatica, IV:2964 Epidural hematoma, III:1521 Epidural space, I:190 Epiglottis, III:1950, 1957 Epiglottitis, II:1220–1221, III:1950, 1952 vs. croup, II:960 from hemophilus infections, III:1586 in laryngeal cancer, III:1516 Epikeratophakia, II:919–920 Epilation. See Alopecia Epilepsy anticonvulsants for, I:253–256 with bed-wetting, I:454 benzodiazepines and, I:467 brain tumors from, I:569 from celiac disease, II:682 cholinergic agents with, II:794 with cisapride, I:272 vs. cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:980 from cytomegalovirus infections, IV:2540 delirium with, II:1021 vs. dissociative disorders, II:1087 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2244 electroencephalography for, II:1152 fluoroquinolones and, II:1346 from head injuries, III:1520, 1522 impulse control disorders and, III:1807 lung abscess with, III:2039 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with oral contraceptives, IV:2403 PET scan for, IV:2677 in pregnancy, III:1633 seizures from, IV:2984–2985 smelling disorders from, IV:3099 See also Seizures Epinephrine, IV:2577 with adrenal gland cancer, I:59–60 adrenal gland scan for, I:60–61 for allergies, I:120, 121 for anaphylaxis, I:179 with antimigraine agents, I:291 bilirubin levels and, III:2024 as bronchodilators, I:601 catecholamines tests for, II:677 for croup, II:960 with diabetes, I:601 for fish poisoning, II:1335 with glaucoma, III:1459 in glucose production, III:1734 for hemorrhoids, I:275 for hives, III:1643 lactic acidosis from, III:1945 with local anesthesia, I:190 for Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 with pheochromocytomas, IV:2578 for physical allergy, IV:2592 prolonged QT syndrome from, IV:2724 for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 for serum sickness, IV:3008 with skin biopsy, IV:3065 for stings, I:503 EpiPen. See Epinephrine Epipen and Ana kit, V:3563 Epiphrenic pouches. See Diverticulum, esophageal Episiotomy, II:757–758, 1221–1223, 1222f Episodic cluster headache. See Cluster headache Epispadias, III:1749–1752 Epistaxis. See Nosebleed Epithelial cells, III:1912 Epithelial hyperplasia, II:1323 Epithelium, cancers of. See Skin cancer Epivir. See Lamivudine EPO. See Epoetin; Erythropoietin Epoetin for bone marrow suppression, II:642, 643, 645 with hemodialysis, II:1061 in immunotherapy, III:1792–1793 Epoetin alfa. See Erythropoietin Epogen. See Epoetin; Erythropoietin Epoietin alpha. See Erythropoietin Epoprostenol, for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785 Eprosartan, for hypertension, I:279–281 EPS. See Extra-pyrammidal side-effects Epsom salts. See Magnesium sulfate Epstein-Barr virus with AIDS, I:77 aplastic anemia from, I:337 chronic fatigue syndrome and, II:802 vs. cytomegalovirus infections, II:998 encephalitis from, II:1177 Guillain-Barré syndrome from, III:1492, IV:2549 head and neck cancer from, III:1516, 1517 with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Erythema infectiosum, II:1328–1330 Erythema migrans, III:2058, 2060 Erythema multiforme, II:1226–1227 from cutis laxa, II:978 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 vs. toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3345 Erythema nodosum, II:1227, V:3593 Erythremia. See Polycythemia vera Erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1227–1230 autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 blood typing for, I:531 jaundice from, III:1882 liver function tests for, III:2026 Erythroblasts, II:1228 Erythrocin. See Erythromycin Erythrocytapheresis, IV:3046 Erythrocyte enzyme deficiency, III:1579 Erythrocyte indices. See Red blood cell indices Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, II:1230–1231 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 with PID, IV:2523 for polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2666 for reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2840 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900–2901, 2902 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3233 for temporal arteritis, V:3248 for thyroiditis, V:3319 See also Red blood cells Erythrocytes. See Red blood cells Erythrocytosis. See Polycythemia Erythroderma, II:976 Erythrodermic psoriasis, IV:2756 Erythrogenic toxin. See Streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin Erythromycin, I:241, 242, II:1231–1233 for acne, I:25, 26 for actinomycosis, I:35 allergic purpura from, I:110 for anthrax, I:225 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antimigraine agents, I:291 for aortic valve stenosis, I:330 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for bowel resection, I:564 with buspirone, I:233 for campylobacteriosis, II:631 for carbuncle, I:537 for cellulitis, II:685 for chancroid, II:730 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for chlamydial pneumoniae, IV:2542 with cisapride, I:273 for colostomy, II:862 for conjunctivitis, II:904 for cross infection, III:1675 for cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:981 with cyclosporine, III:1798 for diphtheria, II:1078 drug interactions with, II:1102 for folliculitis, II:1351–1352 for furunculosis, I:537 for granuloma inguinale, III:1483–1484 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for inclusion conjunctivitis, III:1811 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 for leptospirosis, III:1982 for lymphadenitis, III:2065 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 for mastitis, III:2132 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for parrot fever, IV:2506 with penicillins, IV:2529 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for pneumonia, IV:2640 for rat-bite fever, IV:2822 for relapsing fever, IV:2853 for rosacea, IV:2917 for scarlet fever, IV:2953 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 for strep throat, IV:3179, 3223 for trachoma, V:3356 for trench fever, V:3384 with urinary diversion, V:3452 for whooping cough, V:3559 Erythromycin estolate, II:783 Erythropoietic protoporphyria, IV:2673, 2674–2675 Erythropoietic uroporphyria. See Congenital erythropoietic porphyria Erythropoietin in acute kidney failure, I:44 for AIDS-related anemia, I:80 in chronic kidney failure, II:807 in immunotherapy, III:1792 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2281 in secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 test for, II:1233–1235 use by athletes, II:1234 Erythroxylon coca. See Coca plant Eryzole. See Erythromycin Eschar from burns, I:618 vs. debridement, II:1007 Escherichia coli, II:1235–1238 bacteremia from, I:436 cholangitis from, II:774 3741 Escherichia coli infectious mononucleosis from, III:1823–1824 with lymphomas, III:2093 sore throat from, IV:3118 test for, II:1223–1225 TORCH test for, V:3338 See also Chronic fatigue syndrome Eptifibatide, I:250 Epworth Sleepiness Scales, IV:3091 Equilibrium disorders of (See Balance disorders) nystagmus and, IV:2371 in PSP, IV:2721 tests for, III:2152 Equilibrium radionuclide angiocardiography. See Cardiac blood pool scan Equine encephalomyelitis, II:1178 Equinovarus. See Clubfoot Equinus deformity, III:2263 Equisetum. See Horsetail Equisetum arvense. See Horsetail Erb, Wilhelm H., IV:2874 ERCP. See Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography Erectile dysfunction. See Erection disorders; Impotence Erection. See Penile erection Erection disorders, IV:3015–3017 penile prosthesis for, IV:2531–2532 sildenafil citrate for, IV:3051–3055 See also Impotence Ergoloid mesylates, I:602 Ergonomics for carpal tunnel syndrome, II:669 for costochondritis, II:941 Ergostat. See Ergotamine Ergot alkaloids, I:231 Ergot poisoning, I:290 Ergotamine with breastfeeding, III:1943 with bronchodilators, I:602 for cluster headache, II:825 for migraines, I:289, 290, III:2188 Ergotamine tartrate, for headache, III:1524 EROS clitoral therapy device. See Clitoral therapy device Erosion (Skin), IV:3075 Erosive gastritis, III:1406, 1408 Erotomania, in delusions, II:1023 ERT. See Hormone replacement therapy ERUS. See Endorectal ultrasonography Ery-C. See Erythromycin Ery-Tab. See Erythromycin Erysipelas, II:1225–1226 Erythema multiforme (See Erythema multiforme) nodosum (See Erythema nodosum) in rosacea, IV:2917 from T cells, II:1019 Escherichia coli cultures for, V:3579 cystitis from, II:992 enterobacterial infections from, II:1204, 1205 food poisoning from, II:1353, 1354, 1356 gastroenteritis from, III:1408 hemolytic-uremic syndrome from, III:1580–1581 mastoiditis from, III:2134 newborn meningitis from, III:2154 sputum culture for, IV:3149, 3150 travelers diarrhea from, V:3379 urethritis from, V:3440 urine culture for, V:3457 verotoxin and, II:1235, II:1236, 1237 Esdaile, James, III:1729 Esidrix. See Hydrochlorothiazide Eskalith. See Lithium Esophageal acidity measurement, III:1554 Esophageal atresia, II:1238–1239, IV:2664 Esophageal biopsy, II:1240, III:1554 Esophageal cancer, II:1239–1242, 1241 from achalasia, I:20 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 from heartburn, III:1554 laparoscopy for, III:1948 liver cancer from, III:2019 mediastinoscopy for, III:2143 radiation therapy for, II:639 tube compression for, V:3399 See also Cancer Esophageal diverticulum, II:1244 Esophageal function test, II:1242–1244 Esophageal manometry, I:20 Esophageal motility dysfunction. See Achalasia Esophageal obstruction alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 from esophageal diverticulum, II:1245 Esophageal pouches, II:1244–1246 Esophageal radiography. See Barium swallow Esophageal reflux with asthma, I:380 from esophageal atresia, II:1239 from esophageal diverticulum, II:1244 from scleroderma, IV:2967–2968 Esophageal spasm. See Diffuse esophageal spasm Esophageal speech with head and neck cancer, III:1518 after laryngectomy, III:1956, IV:3124 Esophageal sphincter. See Esophagogastric junction 3742 Esophageal surgery for Chagas’ disease, II:728 for gastroesophageal reflux disease, II:1243 Esophageal temperature, III:1754 Esophageal varices, I:515–517 from alcoholism, I:96 gastric lavage for, IV:3169 from liver failure, III:2028 vs. Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 with nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 from schistosomiasis, IV:2954 sclerotherapy for, IV:2969–2970 tube compression for, V:3399 Esophageal webs, II:1240 Esophagectomy, II:1241 Esophagitis from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 from heartburn, III:1553 indigestion and, III:1813 Esophagogastrectomy, II:1241 Esophagogastric junction in achalasia, I:20 esophageal function test for, II:1242 in gastroesophageal reflux, I:272 Esophagogastroduodenoscopy, I:516, II:1246–1248, 1247 Esophagomyotomy, I:20 Esophagoscopy for esophageal diverticulum, II:1245 for esophagitis, III:1554 for lower esophageal ring, III:2034–2035 Esophagostomy, V:3401 Esophagram, barium. See Barium swallow Esophagus, III:1553 abnormalities of, II:1238, III:1410 Barrett (See Barrett esophagus) bleeding from cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:980 from Mallory-Weiss syndrome, I:210 tube compression for, V:3399 damage to from Chagas’ disease, II:728 from lung biopsy, III:2042 from mediastinoscopy, III:2145 diverticulum, II:978 with goiter, III:1470 perforated, IV:2970 rupture of empyema from, II:1175 pleurisy from, IV:2631 spasms of (See Diffuse esophageal spasm) tube compression of, V:3399–3400 varices of (See Esophageal varices) Esotropia, II:1269, III:1711, IV:3175 See also Strabismus ESR. See Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Essential amino acids. See Amino acids Essential fatty acids. See Fatty acids Essential hypertension. See Hypertension Essential oils. See Aromatherapy Essential thrombocytopenia. See Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Essential tremor. See Tremor Estazolam, for insomnia, I:282 Estebany, Oskar, V:3281 Estomycin. See Erythromycin estolate Estrace. See Estradiol Estraderm. See Estradiol Estradiol HRT and, III:1669 tests for, IV:3013 Estratest, III:1669 Estriol HRT and, III:1669 tests for, I:127, IV:3012 Estrogen antagonists, III:2162 Estrogen fraction test, IV:3013 Estrogen-progestin, IV:2401 Estrogen replacement therapy. See Hormone replacement therapy Estrogens for acne, I:26 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:136, 138, 140, II:1026 in amenorrhea, I:147 anosmia from, IV:3099 with anticonvulsants, I:255 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 for birth control, IV:2401 breast cancer and, I:246 with caffeine, II:626 cholestasis and, II:783 with cholesterol tests, II:793 for contraception, II:1031 in contraception, II:912 cortisol test with, II:937 with cyclosporine, III:1798 dantrolene and, III:2260 in dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 in endometrial cancer, II:1186 endometrial cancer and, II:1188 with erythromycins, II:1233 with face lift, II:1275 with fibrinogen test, II:1320 for galactorrhea, III:1376 gallstones from, III:1388 for gonadotropin deficiency, III:1748 gout and, III:1477 gynecomastia from, III:1497 HRT and, III:1668–1673 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1707 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Ethmoid bone, V:3587 Ethmoid fracture. See Nasal trauma Ethnicity genetic testing and, III:1432 health and, III:2199–2201 in pharmacogenetics, IV:2573–2574 sickle cell disease and, IV:3043, 3044 tuberculosis and, V:3406 Ethosuximide for convulsions, I:253 for seizures, IV:2987 Ethrane. See Enflurane Ethylamide, IV:2691 Ethylene glycol kidney damage from, IV:2337 overdose, III:2179 Ethylene oxide, III:2204 Ethylenediamine, I:520 Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, II:737 for coronary heart disease, II:931 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2553 in platelet count, IV:2624 Etidronate disodium with calcitonin, I:544 for heterotopic ossification, IV:3131 for Paget’s disease, IV:2456 Etodolac, IV:2361, 2901 ETOMS study, III:2252 Etoposide for small cell lung cancer, III:2049 for testicular cancer, V:3258 Etretinate for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 with isotretinoin, I:229 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 Eucalyptus, I:351 as antiseptic, I:350 for bronchitis, I:600 for emphysema, II:1175 for filariasis prevention, II:1331 for influenza, III:1835 for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for physical allergy, IV:2592 poisoning from, IV:2644 for prickly heat, IV:2717 for RSV, IV:2869 for sore throats, IV:3119 for strep throat, IV:3179 Eucalyptus globulus. See Eucalyptus Eugenic Sterilization Law of 1933, III:1424 Eugenics, III:1424 Eupatorium perfoliatum, III:1835 Euphoria in mania, III:2112 neurologic examination for, IV:2351 Euphraisa officinalis. See Eyebright Euphrasia. See Eyebright GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 European arnica. See Arnica European blastomycosis. See Cryptococcosis European blueberry. See Bilberry European buckthorn. See Buckthorn European Cardiology Society, II:629 European skullcap. See Skullcap Eustachian tube in allergic rhinitis, I:112 with nasal packing, IV:2314 with perforated eardrum, IV:2534 Euthanasia, II:1006 Euthymia, neurologic examination for, IV:2351 Euthyroid goiter. See Goiter Eutony, Gerda Alexander, III:2226 Evacuation (Emergency procedure), V:3561 Evening primrose oil for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for cancer, II:1191, V:3538 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for costochondritis, II:940 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 for dermatitis, II:1038 for fibroadenoma, II:1322 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for menopause, III:2162 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 for PCOS, IV:2656 for psoriasis, IV:2758 Evenomation, I:499, 501–502 Event recorders vs. electrophysiologic tests, II:1163 for palpitations, IV:2465–2466 Evidence collection, after rape and sexual assault, IV:2818 Evista. See Raloxifene Evoked potential studies, II:1248–1249 with electromyography, II:1160 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 for sciatica, IV:2964 for spinal stenosis, IV:3136 Ewing’s sarcoma, IV:2942–2945 Exanthem. See Rash Exanthema. See Rash Excedrin, for headache, III:1524 Excedrin migraine, III:2188 Excessive perspiration. See Hyperhidrosis Excision for anal warts, I:172 for angiomas, I:495, 496 for arteriovenous malformations, IV:3203 for chalazion and eyelid tumors, II:1272 for papillomavirus, IV:2542 3743 Excision in hypogonadism, III:1737, 1738 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 for kyphosis prevention, III:1932 liver cancer from, III:2019 menopause and, III:2159–2162 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 oligomenorrhea and, IV:2388 for osteoporosis, III:2197, IV:2427 ovarian cancer and, IV:2440 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for pelvic relaxation, IV:2524, 2525 with penicillins, IV:2529 for perforated septum, IV:2535 plant sources of (See Phytoestrogens) in PMS, IV:2710 postmenopausal bleeding and, IV:2680 precocious puberty and, IV:2691 prolactin test and, IV:2723 prostate cancer and, IV:2733 protein components test and, IV:2745 in puberty, IV:2772 replacement therapy (See Hormone replacement therapy) for senior’s health, IV:2999 with sex change surgery, IV:3011 with sex hormone tests, IV:3012 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 with thyroid tests, V:3309 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3310 thyroxine levels and, V:3310 with triglycerides tests, V:3394 in urinary incontinence, V:3455 uterine fibroids from, V:3458 with vulvovaginitis, V:3539 Estrone, HRT and, III:1669 ESWL. See Lithotripsy Etacercariae, II:1343 Etanercept, for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Ethacrynic acid, III:2079 Ethambutol for mycobacterial infections, III:2277 for tuberculosis, I:310, 311–312, V:3409 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Ethanolamine, for esophageal varices, IV:2969 Ethanolamines, I:277 Ethics gene therapy and, III:1423–1424 genetic testing and, III:1438 Ethionamide for mycobacterial infections, III:2277 for tuberculosis, I:310, 311, 312–313 Excision for skin lesion removal, IV:3072, 3073, 3074 for warts, V:3549 Excisional biopsy, I:575, II:639 for breast cancer, I:580 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 for melanoma, III:2097 for sarcomas, IV:2943 for tumor removal, V:3417 See also Biopsy Excoriation, IV:3075 Excretory urography. See Intravenous urography Exelderm. See Sulconazole Exelon. See Rivastigmine Exercise, II:1249–1252, 1250f with 2,3-DPG tests, V:3420 aerobic (See Aerobic exercises) aging and, I:72 aldolase and, I:100 with aldosterone test, I:101 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:137 amenorrhea from, I:146, III:2169 ammonia levels from, III:2024 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 angina pectoris and, I:194, 195 for angiomas, I:496 for anoxia, I:217 with aortic coarctation, II:830 arteriovenous malformation hemorrhage from, I:358 asbestosis and, I:370, 371 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 asthma and, I:236, 380, 381, 384 with aviation medicine, I:427, 428 in ayurvedic medicine, I:431 for binge eating disorder, I:481 blood pressure and, III:1752 in bowel function, I:565 bruises from, I:607 with bunions, I:615 with bursitis, I:621 with calcium channel blockers, II:627 for cancer, II:637 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 for common cold, II:871 for contractures, II:913 with coronary heart disease, II:933 with coronary stenting, II:934, 935 after cystoscopy, II:997 dehydration from, II:1017 with diabetes, II:1048, 1051, 1052 after disk removal, II:1082 with diuretics, II:1089 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 with emphysema, II:1173 with enterostomies, II:1211 with epididymitis, II:1218 excessive, oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388 3744 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for fracture prevention, II:1365–1366 for gallstone prevention, III:1390 for general adaptation syndrome, III:1425 with growth hormone tests, III:1487 hatha yoga as, III:1513 for headache, III:1524 heart activity during, III:1653 for heart attack prevention, III:1535 after heart surgery, III:1544 after heart transplantation, III:1549 with heart valve repair, III:1550 after heart valve replacement, III:1551 heat stress disorders from, III:1557 for hemophilia, II:829 after hernia repair, III:1627 hypercholesterolemia and, III:1699, 1700 with hyperhidrosis, III:1703 with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 with hypoglycemia, III:1736 with immobilization, III:1782 for insomnia, III:1844–1845 with interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for kyphosis prevention, III:1932 lack of atherosclerosis from, I:394 constipation from, II:906 with coronary heart disease, II:930 heart attacks from, III:1533 high cholesterol and, II:786, 789, 790, 794 with stroke, IV:3198 lactate dehydrogenase levels and, III:1939 lactic acid and, III:1944 with lymphocyte tests, III:2068 in malnutrition, III:2104 for menopause, III:2163 for men’s health, III:2165 with migraines, III:2189 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2260 after myelography, III:2284–2285 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 with overhydration, IV:2449 palpitations and, IV:2465 PCOS and, IV:2656 periodic paralysis and, III:2212, IV:2544 physical allergy from, IV:2592 for Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597 polio and, IV:2648 for postpartum depression prevention, IV:2683 during pregnancy, IV:2712 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 prolactin test and, IV:2724 with prostatitis, IV:2741 qigong and, IV:2799 for rectal prolapse prevention, IV:2835, 2836 for renal artery occlusion, IV:2856 for renal artery stenosis, IV:2857 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for scleroderma, IV:2967 with scoliosis, IV:2972, 2973 senior’s health and, IV:2996–2999, 3000 for speech disorders, IV:3124 for sports injuries, IV:3146, 3147 stress urinary incontinence from, III:2123, V:3453 for stroke prevention, IV:3198 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3234 for tension headache prevention, V:3256 with TIA, V:3373 in vision training, V:3507 wheezing from, V:3554 for women, V:3577 yoga as, V:3594, 3597 See also Tai chi Exercise echocardiography, II:1129 for heart murmurs, III:1541 stress test and, IV:3191 Exercise equipment, IV:2601 Exercise-induced asthma. See Asthma Exercise stress test, IV:3191–3193 vs. ambulatory electrocardiography, III:1653 for angina pectoris, I:195 for arrhythmias, I:353 for atherosclerosis, I:394–395 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:407 cardiac catheterization after, II:656 after coronary artery bypass grafting, II:928 for coronary heart disease, II:930 vs. electrophysiologic tests, II:1163 for heart attacks, III:1534 for ischemia, III:1869 for prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2725 thallium heart scan and, V:3278 Exercise therapy for atherosclerosis, I:397 for autism, I:421 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:659–660 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for cluster headache, II:825 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for COPD, II:811 for coronary heart disease, II:933 for diabetic foot infections, II:1054 for dysmenorrhea, II:1118 for edema, II:1135 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for bronchitis, I:599 with chest physical therapy, II:745 for COPD, II:811 for cough, II:942 in cough suppressants, II:943 for emphysema, II:1174 for wheezing, V:3554 Exploratory surgery for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for gastrinomas, III:1404 Exposure, environmental. See Environmental toxins Exposure therapy. See Desensitization Expressive arts therapy. See Art therapy Extended families, II:1288 Extended simple mastectomy. See Simple mastectomy Extended spectrum penicillins, I:240–241 Extended wear lenses. See Contact lenses External cephalic version, II:724 External fetal monitoring. See Electronic fetal monitoring External fracture fixation. See Fracture repair External hemorrhoids. See Hemorrhoids External radiation therapy. See Radiation therapy External sphincter electromyography, II:1255–1256 Extra-pyrammidal side-effects, I:301 Extracapsular cataract extraction, II:674 Extracorporeal bypass circuit. See Heart-lung machine Extracorporeal circuit, in hemodialysis, I:45, II:1059 Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, II:1256–1258 Extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy. See Lithotripsy Extragonadal tumors, II:797 Extrahepatic cholestasis, II:783 Extraintestinal amebiasis. See Amebiasis Extramammary Paget’s disease. See Paget’s disease of the breast Extramedullary hematopoiesis, III:2282 Extraocular muscles, I:165 Extraocular retinoblastoma. See Retinoblastoma Extraocular tumor surgery, IV:2885–2886 Extrapulmonary tuberculosis. See Tuberculosis Extraversion, III:2286 Extremities artificial (See Artificial limbs) CAT scan of, II:875 congenital abnormalities of (See Congenital amputation) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1716–1718 Extrinsic catatonia. See Catatonia Extruded disk. See Herniated disk Exudates and transudates in pleural effusion, IV:2628–2629 in thoracentesis, V:3284–3285 Exudative macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration Eye anatomy of, II:673 with arteriovenous fistula, I:356 in balance, IV:2371 balance and coordination tests and, I:438 burns of, I:617 in dacryocystitis, II:1003 diseases of (See Eye diseases) in dizziness, II:1094 dryness of (See Dry eye syndromes) examination (See Eye examination) in exophthalmos, II:1252 flickering of (See Nystagmus) with genital herpes, III:1441 infections (See Eye infections) irritation of from contact lenses, II:1268 from sunscreens, IV:3220 in Meniere’s disease, III:2152 misalignment of, II:1269 with mucormycosis, III:2232 paralysis of, III:1930 physical examination of, IV:2593 protection of (See Eye protection) removal (See Enucleation) strain (See Asthenopia) tumors of (See Eye tumors) ultrasonography of, II:1258–1260 vitamin A and, V:3512 vitiligo and, V:3527 Eye balm. See Goldenseal Eye cancer, II:1260–1261 intraocular melanoma (See Intraocular melanoma) retinoblastoma (See Retinoblastoma) retinoblastoma, IV:2882–2889 See also Retinoblastoma Eye care after eye muscle surgery, II:1269–1270 for facial paralysis, I:463 Eye chart for cataracts, II:674 for eye examination, II:1262 Eye damage. See Vision disorders Eye diseases with antimigraine agents, I:290 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 with blepharoplasty, I:518 eye muscle surgery for, II:1269 eyelid (See Eyelid diseases) glaucoma, III:1457–1461 3745 Eye diseases for fecal incontinence, II:1301 for ganglion prevention, III:1393 for gestational diabetes, III:1448 for heart failure, III:1540 with heat treatment, III:1559 for hemolytic anemia, III:1579 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 for herniated disk, III:1629 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 for hypertension, III:1722, 1723 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 Kegel (See Kegel exercises) for low back pain, III:2032, 2034 for mastectomy, III:2130 for mood disorders, III:2217 for multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for myocardial ischemia, III:1871 with obesity surgery, IV:2380 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for pain management, IV:2463 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for Parkinson disease, IV:2501 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 for peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 for PMS, IV:2711 range of motion (See Range of motion exercises) with rehabilitation, IV:2846–2847 for Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2852 for RSV, IV:2869 for sciatica, IV:2964 for silicosis, IV:3056 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 for stress, IV:3186 for syphilis, IV:3230 for tennis elbow, V:3252 for TMJ, V:3250 traditional Chinese medicine and, V:3360 for varicose veins, V:3477 for whiplash, V:3556 Exfoliatins, IV:3160 Exhaustion. See Fatigue Exhaustion reaction, III:1425 Exhibitionism, IV:3018 Exocrine pancreatic cancer, IV:2473–2477 Exophthalmometer, II:1253 Exophthalmos, II:1252–1253 from histiocytosis, III:1639 from orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2407 tarsorrhaphy for, V:3243 Exosurf neonatal, IV:2864 Exotic ungulate encephalopathy. See Spongiform encephalopathy Exotropia, II:1269, IV:3175 Expectorants, II:1253–1254 aromatherapy as, I:348 Eye diseases infections (See Eye infections) injuries (See Eye injuries) laser surgery for, III:1959 microphthalmia and anophthalmia, III:2184–2185 nystagmus from, IV:2372 with phototherapy, IV:2979 tumors (See Eye tumors) ultrasonography for, II:1258–1259 visual impairment from, V:3510 x-rays for, V:3586 Eye drops with calcium channel blockers, II:628 for eye infections, I:243 for glaucoma, III:1459, IV:2999 oxymetazoline in, II:1012 after PRK and LASIK, IV:2587 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 after radial keratotomy, IV:2804 for strabismus, IV:3177 with tarsorrhaphy, V:3243 after trabeculectomy, V:3351 for vitrectomy, V:3528 Eye examination, II:1261–1265 for amblyopia, I:142 with angiomas, I:495 in aviation medicine, I:427 chronic glomerulonephritis and, III:1462 for detached retina prevention, IV:2877 for dyslexia, II:1116 for eye cancer, II:1260 for eyeglasses and contact lenses, II:1265–1266, 1268 for glaucoma, III:1458–1459, 1461 in men’s health, III:2166 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 for orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2407 for papilledema, IV:2488 physical, IV:2593 for pigmentation disorders, IV:3078 for polycythemia vera, IV:2658 for presbyopia, IV:2714 for ptosis, IV:2772 after radial keratotomy, IV:2805 for retinopathy, IV:2891 for sarcoidosis, IV:2940 in senior’s health, IV:2999 with sickle cell anemia, I:183 for strabismus, IV:3176 for trachoma, V:3356 for uveitis, V:3462 for visual impairment, V:3510 for vitamin deficiencies, V:3525 for vitrectomy, V:3528 Eye exercises. See Vision training Eye-hand coordination. See Psychomotor performance Eye infections 3746 from aspergillosis, I:375 cellulitis, II:684 from cold sores, II:846 from contact lenses, II:1267, 1268 in infants, III:1472, IV:2360 with juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1938 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2013 ophthalmic antibiotics and, I:243–244 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2752 sulfonamides for, IV:3216 tetracyclines for, V:3266 ultrasonography for, II:1258–1259 from vitamin A deficiency, V:3512 vitrectomy for, V:3528 Eye injuries burns, I:617 cellulitis from, II:684 cooling treatments for, II:913–914 corneal abrasion, II:918 corneal ulcers from, II:921 glaucoma from, III:1458 hyphema from, III:1727–1728 from maxillofacial trauma, III:2135–2136, 2137 with nasal trauma, IV:2318 retinal vein occlusion from, IV:2879 topical antibiotics and, I:245 ultrasonography for, II:1258–1259 vitrectomy for, V:3528 x-rays for, V:3586 Eye manifestations, from Alport’s syndrome, I:131 Eye massage, IV:2875 Eye movements in death, II:1005 disorders of, I:558 eye examination for, II:1263 with PSP, IV:2721 Eye muscle surgery, II:1269–1270 Eye patches. See Eye protective devices Eye pressure. See Intraocular pressure Eye protection for corneal abrasion, II:918 for corneal ulcer prevention, II:922 for detached retina prevention, IV:2878 with phototherapy, IV:2331 Eye protective devices for albinism, I:91 for hyphema prevention, III:1728 for laser surgery, III:1962 for strabismus, IV:3177 Eye puncture, IV:2875 Eye root. See Goldenseal Eye socket. See Orbit Eye surgery, III:2298–2299 for albinism, I:91 with albinism, IV:3078 for amblyopia, I:142 for eye cancer, II:1260–1261 for hyphema, III:1728 local anesthesia for, I:190 for nystagmus, IV:2372 for pinguecula and pterygium, IV:2602 for ptosis, IV:2771–2772 for retinal vein occlusion, IV:2879 for strabismus, IV:3177 for trachoma, V:3356 vision training after, V:3508 See also Radial keratotomy Eye tremor. See Nystagmus Eye tumors glaucoma from, III:1458 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 ultrasonography for, II:1258–1259 x-rays for, V:3587 See also Retinoblastoma Eyeball. See Eye Eyebright for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for conjunctivitis, II:904 for measles, III:2140 for rubella, IV:2927 for sinusitis, IV:3059 Eyeglass fit, II:1267 Eyeglass frames, II:1266–1267 Eyeglass hearing aids, III:1526 Eyeglasses, II:1265–1268 for albinism, I:91 for amblyopia, I:142 for astigmatism, I:385–386 for cataracts, II:674 after eye muscle surgery, II:1269 hearing aids for, III:1526 for hyperopia, III:1712 laser eye surgery and, IV:2588 for myopia, III:2298 for presbyopia, IV:2714 after radial keratotomy, IV:2806 for senior’s health, IV:2999, 3001 for strabismus, IV:3177 Eyelid diseases, II:1270–1273 edema, II:1271 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 from pinta, IV:2603 from trachoma, V:3356 tumor, I:385, II:1271–1272 See also Ptosis Eyelids in corneal ulcers, II:921 diseases of (See Eyelid diseases) plastic surgery of, I:517–519 in ptosis, IV:2771–2772 spasm of (See Blepharospasm) surgery on, III:2266 tarsorrhaphy and, V:3243 Eyestrain. See Asthenopia GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Fabric softeners, dermatitis from, II:1037 Fabrics, atopic dermatitis from, I:404 Fabry’s disease, III:2003, 2005 Face abnormalities of (See Facial abnormalities) with acromegaly, I:32 edema of, IV:2333 erysipelas of, II:1225 injuries to (See Facial injuries) neurologic examination of, IV:2351 plastic surgery for, IV:2621 seborrheic dermatitis of, IV:2980 spasms of, I:558 Face lift, II:1275–1277 Face warts. See Warts Facial abnormalities from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 from DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1071, 1072 from Down syndrome, II:1098–1099 from lissencephaly, II:890 from peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 Facial hair from hirsutism, III:1636, 1637 from testosterone replacement therapy, III:2162 Facial injuries, III:2135–2137 burns, I:617 jaw fixation for, III:1885 Facial muscles, IV:3122–3124 Facial paralysis, I:461–463, 462 from acoustic neuroma, I:28–29 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 from cochlear implants, II:839 mastoidectomy and, III:2133, 2134 from parotidectomy, IV:2505 from stapedectomy, IV:3156 tarsorrhaphy and, V:3243 from tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3395 Facialplasty. See Face lift Facies, leonine, III:1978 Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267, 2295 Factitious disorders, II:1277–1278 vs. malingering, III:2100, 2101 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 Factor II. See Prothrombin Factor V, IV:2748, 2750 Factor VII, IV:2748, 2750, V:3519 Factor VII deficiency. See Hemophilia Factor VIII, III:1582–1583, 1584, 1585 Factor VIII deficiency. See Hemophilia Factor IX, III:1582–1583, V:3519 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with alemtuzumab, I:102 for facial paralysis, I:463 for genital herpes, III:1442, IV:2542 for shingles, II:751–752, IV:3032 for viral infections, I:315 Familial adenomatous polyposis. See Familial polyposis Familial alobar holoprosencephaly. See Holoprosencephaly Familial ALS. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Familial endocrine adenomatosis. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia Familial hemochromatosis. See Hemochromatosis Familial hypercholesteremia, III:1699, 1707 Familial hypercholesterolemia, III:1421 Familial hypophosphatemia, IV:2585 Familial idiopathic dysproteinemia, IV:2746 Familial idiopathic Fanconi’s syndrome. See Fanconi’s syndrome Familial lipoprotein lipase deficiency, III:1707 Familial Mediterranean fever, II:1281–1285 with amyloidosis, I:161, 163 peritonitis from, IV:2556 Familial neutropenia. See Neutropenia Familial oculoleptomeningeal amyloidosis, II:696 Familial paroxysmal polyserositis. See Familial Mediterranean fever Familial polyposis, II:1285–1287, IV:2834 brain tumors from, I:569 enterostomy for, II:1209 Family in child abuse, II:754 of dementia patients, II:1026 with dissociative identity disorder, III:2244–2245, 2246, 2247 dysfunctional, II:883 stress children’s health and, II:763 somatoform disorders from, IV:3115 therapy (See Family therapy) Family history for allergies, I:117 for Alport’s syndrome, I:131 depression, II:1033 FUO and, II:1318 hypertension and, III:1722 with mental status examination, III:2178 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 with ovarian cancer, IV:2440 with periodic paralysis, IV:2544 3747 Family history F Factor IX deficiency. See Christmas disease Factor XI, III:1584 Factor X, IV:2748, 2750, V:3519 Factor XI deficiency. See Hemophilia FAD. See Alzheimer’s disease Faget’s sign, V:3590 Failed back syndrome. See Low back pain Failure to thrive, II:1278–1279 from celiac disease, II:682 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 growth hormone tests for, III:1489, 1490 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004 with peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 Fainting, II:1094, II:1279–1281, 1280f from cyanosis, II:980 from Depo-Provera, II:1032 in dizziness, II:1095 after drug therapy monitoring, II:1108 electrophysiologic tests for, II:1163 during exercise, III:1726 from Hartnup disease, III:1511 from heat stress disorders, III:1557 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 after sympathectomy, IV:3225 Fainting, tilt table test for, V:3321 Fairy bells. See Foxglove Fairy cap. See Foxglove Fairy finger. See Foxglove Fairy thimbles. See Foxglove Falciparum malaria, III:2088–2090 Fallopian tube diseases HSG for, III:1765 obstruction, III:1808, 1809 Fallopian tubes amylase in, I:160 in birth control, IV:2401 in contraception, II:911 DES exposure and, II:1039–1040 gonorrhea and, III:1472 in hysterectomy, III:1761, 1762 infertility from, III:1831, 1832 pregnancy in (See Ectopic pregnancy) removal of, II:1132 surgery of, IV:2938–2939 in tubal ligation, V:3397 Falls, accidental. See Accidental falls Falope ring, for tubal ligation, V:3397 False strabismus. See Strabismus False unicorn root for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 for PCOS, IV:2656 for PID, IV:2523 FAM regimen, for stomach cancer, IV:3167 Famciclovir Family history physical examination and, IV:2593 with polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 with substance abuse, IV:3210 sudden infant death syndrome and, IV:3213, 3214 for thyroiditis, V:3319 for tremor, V:3381 Family planning, III:1415 See also Birth control Family systems theory, II:1287, 1288–1289, III:2122 Family therapy, II:1287–1290 for ADHD, I:412 for alcoholism, I:98 for anorexia nervosa, I:213 for bulimia, I:613 for children’s health, II:764 for conduct disorder, II:884 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 for gender identity disorder, III:1418 with mental retardation, III:2175 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for post-concussion syndrome, IV:2679 for schizophrenia, IV:2962 for somatoform disorders, IV:3116 for substance abuse, IV:3210, 3211 Famotidine for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for hiatal hernias, III:1624 for indigestion, III:1814 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 Famvir. See Famciclovir Fanconi renaltubular syndrome. See Fanconi’s syndrome Fanconi’s anemia, I:337, II:1290 Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290–1291 hypokalemia from, III:1740 renal tubular acidosis from, IV:2858 uric acid tests for, V:3442 urinalysis for, V:3445 FAP. See Familial polyposis Farmer’s lung, III:1717, 2050 Farsightedness. See Hyperopia FAS. See Fetal alcohol syndrome Fascia, in flesh-eating disease, II:1336 Fasciculation with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:163, 165 electromyography for, II:1160 in muscle spasms and cramps, III:2260 Fasciola hepatica, II:1342 Fascioliasis, II:1342 Fasciotomy, II:1291–1292, IV:2410 Fastin. See Phentermine Fasting, II:1041, 1043, II:1292–1294, II:1294 3748 for blood glucose tests, I:529 bulimia and, I:612 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for erythropoietin test, II:1234 for eye muscle surgery, II:1269 for gastric acid determination, III:1400 for gonorrhea, III:1473 hypokalemia from, III:1740 for iron tests, III:1863 as migraine trigger, III:2188 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for uric acid tests, V:3442 See also Diet therapy Fasting blood glucose in blood glucose tests, I:529 in coronary heart disease, II:930 with diabetes mellitus, II:1050 in gestational diabetes, III:1448 test of (See Blood glucose tests) Fasting hypoglycemia. See Hypoglycemia Fat cells. See Adipocytes Fat malabsorption. See Malabsorption syndromes Fat-restricted diet for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 for cholestasis, II:785 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for diarrhea, II:1067 with endarterectomy, II:1182 for heart attack prevention, III:1535 for hepatitis C, III:1604 for high cholesterol, II:789 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699, 1700 for hypertension, III:1722, 1723 for hypoglycemia, III:1737 for intestinal polyps prevention, III:1851 for macular degeneration, III:2075 for obesity surgery, IV:2380 for PMS, IV:2711 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 for senior’s health, IV:2998 for tendinitis, V:3251 Fat retention coefficient, IV:3173 Fatal familial insomnia, II:950, 952–953 Father-child bonding, II:761 Fatigue, II:1295–1298 from acute kidney failure, I:44 from allergic rhinitis, I:112 chronic (See Chronic fatigue syndrome) from CO poisoning, II:652 cold sores from, II:844 common cold from, II:869 from contact lenses, IV:2714 decompression sickness and, II:1009 from delirium, II:1022 electrophysiologic tests for, II:1163 from fibromyalgia, II:1326 from fluke infection, II:1343 from gammaglobulin, III:1391 from general adaptation syndrome, III:1425 genital herpes outbreaks from, III:1440 hallucinations from, III:1504 keratitis from, III:1904 from kidney failure, I:44 from multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 from multiple sclerosis, III:2250, 2253 with palpitations, IV:2465 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 from phototherapy, IV:2591 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 from radiation therapy, II:1191 with restless legs syndrome, IV:2870 shingles from, IV:3031 from trichinosis, V:3386 Fats in acidosis, III:2179 in aging, I:69 blood levels of, III:1741 body (See Adipose tissue) breast cancer from, I:578 colon cancer and, II:849 coronary heart disease from, II:930 in diarrhea, II:1066 diet therapy and, IV:2367 dietary (See Dietary fats) embolism, from plastic surgery, IV:2622 hydrogenated, III:1708 rectal cancer from, IV:2828 Fatty acids for acne, I:26 for cluster headache, II:825 for DNA damage, I:428 lipase and, III:2002 in liver encephalopathy, III:2022 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 with peroxisomal disorders, IV:2560, 2561 Fatty liver, II:1298–1299 from alcoholic hepatitis, III:1598 from alcoholism, I:96 CAT scan for, II:877 from NRTIs, I:304 from Reye’s syndrome, IV:2895 Fatty tissue. See Adipose tissue Fatty tumor. See Lipoma Fava beans, III:1463 Favism, I:287 FBN1 gene, III:2114 FDA. See U.S. Food and Drug Administration FDP. See Fibrin split products GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 after laryngectomy, III:1955 obstruction of, III:1411 x-rays for, III:1923 Feelings. See Emotions Feet. See Foot Feingold, Dr. Ben, I:411 Felbamate, for convulsions, I:253 Felbatol. See Felbamate Feldenkrais, Moshe, II:1304, 1305 Feldenkrais Guild of North America, II:1304 Feldenkrais method, II:1304–1306, III:2225–2226 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for corns and calluses, II:924 for stress reduction, IV:3190 Feline spongiform encephalopathy. See Spongiform encephalopathy Felodipine, with grapefruit juice, II:1102 Feltwort. See Mullein Felty’s syndrome. See Rheumatoid arthritis Female circumcision. See Female genital mutilation Female condoms. See Condoms Female genital diseases, III:1441 See also specific diseases Female genital mutilation, II:812, II:1306–1307 Female genitalia, III:1737 Female ginseng. See Dong quai Female hormones. See Estrogens; Progestins Female infertility. See Infertility Female pseudohermaphrodite. See Hermaphroditism Female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308–1309 Female sexual dysfunctions. See Sexual dysfunctions Feminization from hypogonadism, III:1738 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012, 3013 Femoral artery in arteriovenous malformations, I:330 in atherosclerosis, I:394 in balloon angioplasty, II:934, 935 in cardiac catheterization, II:655 in hernia repair, III:1625–1626 Femoral hernia. See Hernia Femoral pulse, II:830 Femstat. See Butoconazole Femur in congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 in hip replacement, III:1891 in knee replacement, III:1891 in osteochondrosis, IV:2416 sarcomas of, IV:2942 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Fen-phen. See Fenfluramine-phentermine Fenfluramine, for weight loss, IV:2376 Fenfluramine-phentermine heart valve diseases from, V:3474 for weight loss, IV:2376 Fenicol. See Chloramphenicol Fennel for indigestion, III:1814 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 Fenofibrate, for high cholesterol, II:787, 789 Fenoprofen, aspirin allergy and, I:378 Fentanyl, for general anesthesia, I:187, II:1165 Fenthon, III:1842 Fenugreek, for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 Ferritin test, III:1863, 1864, 1865 Ferrochelatase, IV:2673 Ferrous gluconate. See Iron Ferrous sulfate. See Iron Ferrum phosphate for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for otitis media, IV:2435 Ferrum phosphoricum, for allergies, I:121 Fertility agents. See Infertility drugs Fertility disorders. See Infertility Fertilization in contraception, II:911 with IUDs, III:1876 Fertilization in vitro, III:1808–1810 ectopic pregnancy and, II:1131 for infertility, III:1829, 1832–1833 luteinizing hormone test for, III:2056 Fertinex. See Urofollotropins FES. See Flower Essence Society Fetal abnormalities alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127–128 with oligohydramnios, IV:2664–2665 with polyhydramnios, IV:2664–2665 recurrent miscarriages from, IV:2836 Fetal addiction, I:177 Fetal age. See Gestational age Fetal alcohol syndrome, I:91, 92, 96, 490, II:1309–1312 with DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 mental retardation from, III:2174 Fetal blood sampling, II:1229 Fetal brain damage during childbirth, II:769 mental retardation from, III:2174 Fetal cell transplantation, V:3383 Fetal death from CO poisoning, II:651 from placental abruption, IV:2613 3749 Fetal death FDP test. See Fibrin split products Fear fainting from, II:1280 with generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 of illness (See Hypochondriasis) of insanity (See Hypochondriasis) in motion sickness, III:2218 mutism from, III:2272 panic disorder and, IV:2482–2483 premature ejaculation from, IV:2699 Featherfew. See Feverfew Featherfoil. See Feverfew Febrifuge plant. See Feverfew Febrile agglutination tests. See Fever evaluation tests Febrile seizures. See Seizures Fecal culture. See Stool culture Fecal fats. See Stool fats Fecal impaction in autonomic dysreflexia, IV:3130 bowel function and, I:565 enemas for, II:1199 laxatives and, III:1964 Fecal incontinence, II:1299–1302, IV:3062 Fecal lipids. See Stool fats Fecal occult blood test, II:1302–1304 for colon cancer, II:850 in men’s health, III:2165–2166 sigmoidoscopy with, IV:3049 for stomach cancer, IV:3165 Fecal samples. See Stool specimen analysis Fecal smear, for food poisoning, II:1355 Fecalith, II:1092 Feces balantidiasis from, I:441 colonic irrigation and, II:855 cryptosporidiosis from, II:967 cutaneous larvae migrans from, II:974 discoloration of, I:311 giardiasis from, III:1450 hand-foot-mouth disease from, III:1507 intestinal obstruction from, III:1848 schistosomiasis from, IV:2954 stool culture and, IV:3171 tapeworm infections from, V:3239–3240 Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act, I:505 Feedback, biological. See Biofeedback Feeding behavior, with colic, II:847 Feeding tubes for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, IV:3122 for anorexia nervosa, I:212 enterostomy for, II:1210 laparascopy for insertion, III:1948 Fetal death from syphilis, IV:2541 Fetal development, IV:2695 with arteriovenous malformations, I:357 atrial septal defects, I:409 birth defects in, I:490 carcinoembryonic antigen and, II:654 in congenital amputation, II:887 in congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 growth retardation, III:1852–1853 hearing, I:416 in high risk pregnancy, III:1633 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2703–2704 sex hormones and, III:1737 with situs inversus, IV:3060 Fetal distress cesarean section for, II:725, 759 CST and NST, I:221–223 electronic fetal monitoring for, II:1161, 1162 forceps delivery for, II:758–759 Fetal echocardiography, II:900 Fetal erythroblastosis. See Erythroblastosis fetalis Fetal growth retardation, III:1851–1853 Fetal heart rate during childbirth, II:760 with CST and NST, I:221–223 electronic fetal monitoring for, II:1161–1162 Fetal heartbeat in breech position, I:595 in stillbirth, IV:3163 Fetal hemoglobin, III:1576, IV:3214 Fetal hemoglobin test, II:1312–1313 Fetal monitoring before cesarean section, II:724 during childbirth, II:760 electronic (See Electronic fetal monitoring) in high-risk pregnancy, III:1633 in induced labor, III:1816–1817 in premature labor, IV:2701 Fetal nigal cell transplantation, IV:2501, IV:2503, V:3383 Fetal nonstress test, II:1162, IV:3163 Fetal position, II:1118 Fetal surgery for birth defects, I:492–493 for congenital amputation, II:887 for movement disorders, III:2222 Fetal ultrasonography. See Prenatal ultrasonography Fetishism, IV:3018 Fetoscopy, during childbirth, II:760 Fetus abnormalities of (See Fetal abnormalities) amniotic fluid and, IV:2664 benzodiazepines and, I:467 3750 breech presentation, I:594–596 development of (See Fetal development) MRI of, III:2082 oxytocin and, II:1109 radiation injuries to, IV:2808 trauma to from amniocentesis, I:154 congenital brain defects from, II:891 FEV1. See Forced expiratory volume Fever, II:1313–1316, 1314f acetaminophen for, I:18–19 acute pharyngoconjunctival, I:56 amenorrhea from, I:147 with animal bites, I:499, 500 aspirin for, I:377–378 from barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 beriberi and, I:469 after bone marrow biopsy, I:549 with cat-scratch disease, II:670 with chickenpox, II:750 cold sores from, II:844 cooling treatments for, II:914–915 from cross infection, III:1674, 1675 dehydration from, II:1017 dengue (See Dengue fever) from epiglottitis, II:1220 from flesh-eating disease, II:1337 from fluoroquinolones, II:1346 with gammaglobulin, III:1392 with gonorrhea, III:1474 with granisetron, II:644 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 IV fluids for, III:1853 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 katayama, IV:2954 from malaria, III:2088 from near drowning, IV:2327 with pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 with puerperal infection, IV:2774 Reye’s syndrome and, IV:2895–2896 from rickettsialpox, IV:2907 with RMSF, IV:2910 in roseola, IV:2919, 2920 with sepsis, IV:3004 after T & A, V:3326 of unknown origin (See Fever of unknown origin) urinalysis for, V:3445 from yellow fever, V:3591 Fever blisters. See Cold sore Fever evaluation tests, II:1316 Fever of unknown origin, II:1316–1318, III:1383 Feverfew for headache, III:1524 for migraines, III:2189 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 Fexofenadine for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:277 for allergy, I:119 FGM. See Female genital mutilation FGNA. See Feldenkrais Guild of North America Fiber (Dietary). See Dietary fiber FiberCon. See Psyllium Fiberoptic scope examination. See Sigmoidoscopy Fibric acid derivatives for atherosclerosis, I:396 for high cholesterol, II:787, 789 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 Fibrillation arterial, I:355 atrial (See Atrial fibrillation) defibrillation for, II:1015 electrocardiography for, II:1148 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1165 from hyperkalemia, III:1705 Fibrin in antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 in atherosclerosis, I:393 from empyema, II:1175 in endocarditis, II:1183 hemophilia and, III:1582–1584 Fibrin breakdown products. See Fibrin split products Fibrin degradation products. See Fibrin split products Fibrin split products, II:1318–1320 Fibrinogen in coagulation disorders, II:828 in hypercoagulation, III:1701 PT test for, IV:2748, 2750 test of, II:1320–1321 Fibrinolysis, II:1319 Fibrinolytic inhibitors, V:3535 Fibrinolytic system, II:827 Fibroadenoma, I:575, II:1321–1322 Fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1321–1322, II:1322–1326, II:1323, II:1324 examinations for, I:579 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 Fibroid tumors laparoscopy for, III:1949 from methysergide, II:825 uterine (See Uterine fibroids) Fibroids. See Fibroid tumors Fibroma nodules, IV:3075 Fibromuscular dysplasia cerebral aneurysm from, II:697 renal artery stenosis from, IV:2856 renovascular hypertension and, IV:2860 Fibromyalgia, II:1326–1328 chronic fatigue syndrome and, II:802 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Fine needle aspiration biopsy for breast cancer, I:580 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1324 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 for laryngeal cancer, III:1952 for lung cancer, III:2044, 2048 for lymph node biopsy, I:170 of the lymph nodes, III:2062–2063 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2475 for thyroid biopsy, V:3304–3305 Finger joint arthroplasty for, I:361 in osteoarthritis, IV:2412 sprains of, IV:3147 Finger pressure therapy. See Acupressure Fingernail abnormalities of, IV:2307–2309 injuries, II:1332, 1333 with juvenile arthritis, III:1894 with selenium toxicity, III:2195 Fingers congenital amputation of, II:887 with genital herpes, III:1441 hyperparathyroidism and, III:1713 with juvenile arthritis, III:1894 mallet, III:2101–2102 reattachment, leeches for, III:1971 Fingertip injuries, II:1332–1334 Finn chamber method. See Patch tests Fire weed. See Plantain Fires burns from, I:619 smoke inhalation from, IV:3102 First aid. See Emergency treatment First-degree burns. See Burns First pregnancy trimester abortion during, I:10–11 in congenital amputation, II:887 FISH. See Fluorescent in situ hybridization Fish with antituberculosis drugs, I:310–311 poisoning from, I:560, II:1334–1336, II:1353 tapeworm infections in, V:3239–3240, 3241 vitamin B6 in, V:3513 Fish disease. See Ichthyosis Fish oils for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for eclampsia/preeclampsia prevention, IV:2694 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 Fish scale disease. See Lamellar ichthyosis Fish tapeworm, IV:2558 Fistulas GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 anal (See Anal fistula) anorectal, I:210–211 arteriovenous, I:356 from cholecystitis, II:779 from diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 H type, V:3351 intestinal (See Intestinal fistula) Fitzgerald, William H., IV:2842 Five elements acupuncture and, I:42 in ayurvedic medicine, I:430 5-day measles. See Measles Fixed contracture. See Contracture FK506. See Tacrolimus Flaccid bladder. See Neurogenic bladder Flaccid paralysis. See Paralysis Flagyl. See Metronidazole Flannel leaf. See Mullein Flapdock. See Foxglove Flashbacks from LSD, III:2074 from PTSD, IV:2685–2686 Flashlamp-pulsed dye laser, I:495 Flat moles, IV:3074 Flat warts, V:3548 Flatworms. See Trematodes Flavivirus arbovirus encephalitis from, I:347 hemorrhagic fevers from, III:1591 yellow fever, V:3590–3591 Flavonoids for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 Flax, for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 Flax oil, for cerumen, III:1530 Flaxseed oil for constipation, II:907 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for menopause, III:2162 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 Fleas bartonella henselae in, II:669 hives from, III:1642 plague and, IV:2614–2615 Flemish hereditary cerebral hemorrhage, II:696 Flesh-eating bacteria. See Streptococcus pyogenes Flesh-eating disease, II:1336–1337, III:1393, IV:3178, 3179, 3182 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from cellulitis, II:684, 685 Flexeril. See Cyclobenzaprine Flexible sigmoidoscopy. See Sigmoidoscopy Flexon frames. See Eyeglass frames Flexor tendon injuries, II:1333 3751 Flexor tendon injuries electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 reflexology for, IV:2843 Fibromyositis. See Fibromyalgia Fibromytosis. See Fibromyalgia Fibrosarcomas, IV:2942 Fibrosis from ARDS, I:67 breast, II:1324 breast biopsy for, I:575 cavernosal (See Cavernosal fibrosis) interstitial, I:57 from myelofibrosis, III:2282 pulmonary (See Pulmonary fibrosis) restrictive cardiomyopathy from, IV:2872 from silicosis, IV:3055 Fibrositis. See Fibromyalgia Fibrotic lung disease, III:2054 Fibrous dysplasia of bone, I:557 Field horsetail. See Horsetail Fifth cranial nerve. See Trigeminal nerve Fifth disease. See Erythema infectiosum Fig warts. See Genital warts Fight bites. See Clenched fist injury Fight or flight response catecholamines in, II:677 in general adaptation syndrome, III:1425 in generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 stress reduction and, IV:3187 sympathetic nervous system, IV:3224 FIGO system, for cervical cancer, II:713 Filarial worms elephantiasis from, II:1166–1167 lymphedema from, III:2067 Filariasis, II:1330–1332 lymphedema from, III:2067 lymphography for, III:2066 Filgrastim, III:1791 for AIDS, I:80 for bone marrow suppression, II:642, 742 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647–1648 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2281 Filipendula ulmaria. See Meadowsweet Fillings, dental. See Dental fillings Filoviridae, III:1590 Filtrate, in nephrotoxic injury, IV:2336 Finasteride for alopecia, I:126 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1203 erection disorders with, IV:3051 Flight medicine Flight medicine. See Aviation medicine Flirtwort. See Feverfew Flooding therapy. See Implosive therapy Floor bone x-rays, V:3587 Flopdock. See Foxglove Floppy valve. See Mitral valve prolapse Florida Institute for Fetal Diagnosis and Therapy, II:887 Florinef. See Fludrocortisone Flossing, IV:2406 for bad breath, I:437 with braces, III:2107 for periodontal diseases prevention, IV:2548 for toothache, V:3338 for toothache prevention, V:3338 Flotation therapy, IV:3190 Flour, tapeworms in, V:3240 Flovent. See Futicasone Flow cytometry, IV:2874 Flower Essence Society, II:1338–1339 Flower essences. See Flower remedies Flower remedies, II:1338–1341, 1340t for acute stress disorder, I:49 for stings, I:503 for stress reduction, IV:3189 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 Floxin. See Ofloxacin Floxuridine, for liver cancer, III:2021 Flu. See Influenza Flu vaccine. See Influenza vaccine Fluconazole with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for blastomycosis, IV:3121 for candidiasis, II:646 with cisapride, I:273 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cross infection, III:1675 for cryptococcosis, II:965 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 for systemic fungal infection, I:267, 268 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 5-Flucytosine for cryptococcosis, II:965 for systemic fungal infection, I:267 Fludarabine alemtuzumab and, I:102 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 Fludrocortisone, II:937 for Addison’s disease, I:54 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 for mineralocorticoid deficiency, II:936 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 Fluid analysis for ganglion, III:1392 3752 for impetigo, III:1802 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for smallpox, IV:3096 Fluid balance. See Fluid-electrolyte balance Fluid-electrolyte balance in Addison’s disease, I:53 aldosterone and, I:100 in burns, I:618 with colostomy, II:863 from cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:980 in dehydration, II:1017 in delirium, II:1020–1021 in diabetes insipidus, II:1046 for diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1056 in diarrhea, II:1066 for drug overdose, II:1106 with electric shock injuries, II:1144 electrolytes and, II:1153–1156, 1157 in enemas, II:1200 with enterobacterial infections, II:1206 with enterostomies, II:1211 with escherichia coli, III:1581 in food poisonig, II:1355 from gastric lavage, IV:3169 in Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 in heat stress disorders, III:1557 in hyperkalemia, III:1705 in hypernatremia, III:1710 in hypokalemia, III:1739 with intestinal obstruction, III:1848 kidney function tests for, III:1912 laxatives and, III:1964 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 from Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 with marathon running, III:1743 in metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 in mushroom poisoning, III:2268 with overhydration, IV:2449 with pentamidine isoethionate, IV:2636 potassium in, III:1739 in whooping cough, V:3559 in yellow fever, V:3591 Fluid in the brain. See Intracranial hypertension Fluid replacement. See Fluid therapy Fluid replacement solutions. See Oral rehydration solutions Fluid retention. See Edema Fluid therapy for acidosis, III:2179 for acute kidney failure, I:45 for alcohol withdrawal, I:93, 98 for amebic dysentery, I:145 for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239 with anticancer drugs, I:247 in aviation medicine, I:428 for bladder stones, I:510, 511 for blood loss, V:3583 for burns, I:618 for campylobacteriosis, II:631 for cholera, II:782 for colostomy, II:863 for constipation, II:907 for cryptosporidiosis, II:967 for cyclosporiasis, II:982 after cystectomy, II:983 for cystitis, II:994 after cystometry, II:995 for dehydration, II:1017 for diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1056 for electric shock injuries, II:1144 for electrolyte disorders, II:1156 for emphysema, II:1174 for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 for fever from rickettsialpox, IV:2907 for fish and shellfish poisoning, II:1334 for food poisoning, II:1355 for gangrene, III:1395 for gout, III:1478 for heat stress disorders, III:1557–1558 for heat treatment, III:1559 for heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 for hypercalcemia, III:1697–1698 for hypernatremia, III:1710 for hyperparathyroidism, III:1714 for hypothermia, III:1755 for influenza, III:1834 intravenous (See Intravenous fluid replenishment) for Japanese encephalitis, III:1880 for kidney stones, III:1918, 1919 for labyrinthitis, III:1935 for malaria, III:2090 for Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 for metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 with nausea, IV:2326 for nephritis, IV:2334 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 for orthostatic hypotension, IV:2411 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for premature labor, IV:2701 pyelonephritis and, IV:2790 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for RSV, IV:2868 for rubella, IV:2927 for shigellosis, IV:3028–IV:3029 for sickle cell anemia, III:1578 for splenic trauma, IV:3142 for starvation, IV:3162 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for campylobacteriosis, II:631 for cystitis, II:993 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 with metals, II:1102 Fluoroscopy in angioplasty, I:201 for catheter ablation, II:680 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1164 of esophagus, II:1242, 1243 for gallbladder x-rays, III:1382 for gallstones, III:1388 of joints, I:359–360 with PTHC, IV:2533 for sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 for skin lesions, IV:3076 for venography, V:3492 Fluothane. See Halothane Fluoxetine, I:256, IV:2990 for ADHD, I:412 with alprazolam, I:232 for anorexia nervosa, I:213 with antimigraine agents, I:291 for anxiety, I:231 for bipolar disorder, I:487 for depression, II:1034 drug interactions with, II:1102 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 for migraine prevention, III:2188 for mood disorders, III:2217 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for paraphilias, IV:3019 for phobias, I:73, IV:2583 for PMS, IV:2710–2711 for premature ejaculation, IV:2700, 3017 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for PTSD, IV:2686 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 for weight loss, IV:2376 Fluphenazine HCI, V:3242 Flurazepam, for insomnia, I:282 Flurbiprofen, II:940, IV:2361 Fluroquinolones, I:241, 242 Fluroxamine, I:420 Flush free. See Inositol hexanicotinate Flushing wounds, V:3580 Flutamide for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:886 for PCOS, IV:2655 Fluvastatin for high cholesterol, II:787, 789, 790 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 Fluvoxamine, IV:2990 with antimigraine agents, I:291 for anxiety, I:231 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for phobias, IV:2583 FMF. See Familial Mediterranean fever FMR-1 gene, II:1366–1367 FNA. See Fine needle aspiration FNAB. See Fine needle aspiration biopsy Foams (Topical). See Ointments FOBT. See Fecal occult blood test Focal dystonia. See Dystonia Focal glomerulosclerosis, IV:2335 Focal neuropathy. See Diabetic neuropathies Focusing (Visual), V:3508 Folacin. See Folic acid Folate, V:3524 for canker sores, IV:3170 after gastrectomy, III:1399 for platelet function disorders, IV:2626 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2870 with small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 vitamin toxicity from, V:3523 Folate deficiency bone marrow aspiration for, I:549 canker sores from, IV:3170 megaloblastic anemia from, V:3524 neutropenia from, IV:2353 Folen, Lilias, III:1514 Folex. See Methotrexate Foley catheterization, V:3450–3451, V:3455 Folic acid, II:1347–1348 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:140 for birth defect prevention, I:493 for congenital brain defect prevention, II:892 deficiency in, IV:3217 deficiency in, II:1347 for folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 for G6PD, III:1465 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 for neutropenia, IV:2354 during pregnancy, IV:2697, 2712 for restless legs syndrome prevention, IV:2871 for spina bifida prevention, IV:3126 Folic acid deficiency anemia, I:180–181, 184, II:1348–1350 red blood cell indices for, IV:2839 reticulocyte count for, IV:2875 Folinic acid, for toxoplasmosis, V:3350 Follicle stimulating hormone. See FSH Follicular cysts, IV:2445–2446 3753 Follicular cysts for strongyloidiasis, V:3292 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3203 for ulcerative colitis, V:3431 for urinary diversion, V:3452 Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome from, III:1930 for whooping cough, V:3559 for yellow fever, V:3591 for yersiniosis, V:3593 See also Oral rehydration solutions Fluids and secretions body (See Body fluids) in CAT scan, II:877 hematocrit test for, III:1572 Fluke infection, II:1341–1344 indigestion from, III:1813 schistosomiasis from, IV:2953 Flumandine. See Rimantadine Flunisolide, for asthma, I:601 Fluorescein for corneal abrasion, II:918 for corneal ulcers, II:922 for keratitis, III:1905 Fluorescein angiography, I:198 for eye cancer, II:1260 for macular degeneration, III:2076 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 for retinopathy, IV:2891 Fluorescence bronchoscopy. See Bronchoscopy Fluorescent antibody technique for AIDS, I:79–80, 83, 86 for anthrax, I:225 for epidermolysis bullosa, II:1117 for Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 with kidney biopsy, III:1908 for parrot fever, IV:2506 for rabies, IV:2802 for SCID, IV:3010 for scrub typhus, IV:2977 for skin lesions, IV:3076 for vitamin tests, V:3521 Fluorescent antinuclear antibody test. See Antinuclear antibodies, test for Fluorescent in situ hybridization for cri du chat syndrome, II:955 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 Fluorescent light, for neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 Fluorescent treponemal antibodyabsorption test, IV:3229 Fluorides for infants, IV:2405 lactate dehydrogenase levels and, III:1939 for tooth decay, III:2195, 2197, IV:2406 Fluorinated quinolones. See Fluoroquinolones Fluoroplex. See 5-fluorouracil Fluoroquinolones, II:1344–1346 for antibiotic prophylaxis, IV:2726 Folliculitis Folliculitis, II:1351–1352 Folling, Asbjorn, IV:2575 Folling’s disease. See Phenylketonuria Follistim. See Follitropin beta Follitropin alfa, for infertility, III:1830 Follitropin beta, for infertility, III:1830 Folstein Mini-Mental Status Examination, III:2176 Fong disease. See Nail-patella syndrome Fontaine, J.A., IV:2450 Fontan procedure, II:902, III:1543 Fontanel. See Fontanelle Fontanelle, in dehydration, II:1017 Food with ACE inhibitors, I:203, 204–205 allergies from (See Food hypersensitivity) in anorexia nervosa, I:213 bowel function and, I:565 with braces, III:2106 for cancer prevention, II:637 with catecholamines tests, II:677 Chagas’ disease from, II:727 choking from, II:772 in cold sores, II:845, 846 colic from, II:847 contaminated (See Food poisoning) cryptococcosis from, II:964 diarrhea from, I:264 for enteral nutrition, V:3401 enterobacterial infections from, II:1205 in epiglottitis, II:1220 fluke infection from, II:1342 genetic responses to, IV:2574 heavy metal poisoning from, III:1560 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1564–1566 hepatitis A from, III:1610 hiccups from, III:1631 itching from, I:285 with lymphocyte tests, III:2068 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 melioidosis from, III:2150 in motion sickness, III:2218, 2220 for nausea, IV:2326 potassium in, III:1740 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2935 with seborrheic dermatitis, IV:2981 spicy with food poisoning, II:1355 hyperhidrosis from, III:1704 with rosacea, IV:2918 tapeworm infections in, V:3239–3242 travelers diarrhea from, V:3378 tularemia from, V:3411 urinalysis and, V:3444 yersiniosis from, V:3592 Food additives birth defects from, I:490 3754 hives from, III:1642 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 vegetarianism and, V:3486, 3487 Food allergy. See Food hypersensitivity Food and Drug Administration. See U.S. Food and Drug Administration Food and Nutrition Board, III:2196 Food-borne botulism. See Botulism Food-borne toxins, II:1352–1355 Food coloring agents, I:378 Food contamination amebiasis from, I:143 balantidiasis from, I:441 botulism from, I:559–561, 562 from cholera, II:781–782 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from, II:950, 953–954 from E. coli, II:1235, III:1580–1581 fish and shellfish poisoning from, II:1334, 1335–1336 food poisoning from, II:1352–1356 in gastroenteritis, III:1408, 1409, 1410 giardiasis from, III:1450–1451 hepatitis A from, III:1596, 1597 listeriosis from, III:2012, 2013, 2014 Q fever from, IV:2797 rotaviruses and, IV:2922 Food extract allergies, I:123 Food handling for E. coli prevention, II:1237 in food poisoning, II:1353–1356 for scromboid prevention, II:1335 for strongyloidiasis prevention, V:3292–3293 Food hypersensitivity, I:115–116, 118, 122 with ACE inhibitors, I:203, 204–205 with adenoid hyperplasia, I:55–56 ADHD and, I:411 anaphylaxis from, I:179, 180 with antituberculosis drugs, I:310–311 atopic dermatitis from, I:404 with bursitis, I:620 canker sores from, II:648 cluster headache from, II:824 colic from, II:847 detoxification for, II:1042 diarrhea from, II:1066 dizziness from, II:1095 dyspepsia from, II:1118 genital herpes outbreaks from, III:1440 hives from, III:1642 as migraine trigger, III:2187, 2188–2189 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 with rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 stomach ulcer from, V:3434 with systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 testing for, I:123–125 wheezing from, V:3554 Food poisoning, II:1352–1356, 1355t botuism, V:3382 from botulinum toxin, I:558, 559–560 from Campylobacter, II:630 vs. CO poisoning, II:652 cyanosis from, II:980 diarrhea from, II:1066 from fish and shellfish, II:1334–1336 nausea from, IV:2325 vegetarianism and, V:3486 See also Botulism Food preservatives hives from, III:1642 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 Food safety for botulism prevention, I:562 for food poisoning prevention, II:1356 immunologic diseases and, III:1787 to prevent bacterial infections, III:1581 for rotaviruses prevention, IV:2922 Food Safety and Inspection Service, III:2012 Food therapy. See Diet therapy Foodnet, on listeriosis, III:2012 Foot abnormalities, III:2115 from Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 bunions, I:614–616 burns of, I:617 congenital amputation of, II:887 corns and calluses of, II:923 with diabetes mellitus (See Diabetic foot) diabetic (See Diabetic foot) edema of from acute kidney failure, I:44 from congestive cardiomyopathy, II:896 from heart failure, III:1538 from nephritis, IV:2333 embolism of, I:355 flat, from cutis laxa, II:978 gout in, III:1479 heel spurs and, III:1562 muscle spasms and cramps of, III:2261 position, with heel spurs, III:1562 pressure receptors, III:2218 surgery of, I:190 Foot-a-night vine. See Kudzu Foot and mouth disease, III:1506 Foot care, II:1357, III:1394 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Fortaz. See Ceftazidime Forte. See Phendimetrazine Fortovase. See Saquinavir Fortraz. See Ceftazidime Fortune-teller. See Dandelion Fosamax. See Alendronate Foscarnet for cross infection, III:1675 for cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 for encephalitis, II:1179 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for viral infections, I:315, 316 Fosinopril for hypertension, I:203 with penicillins, IV:2529 Foundations for Holistic Health Nursing Practices (Krieger), V:3283 Fournier’s gangrene. See Flesh-eating disease Fourth pharyngeal pouch syndrome. See DiGeorge’s syndrome Foxes glofa. See Foxglove Foxglove for arrhythmias, I:354 for heart disease, II:1073 poisoning from, IV:2644 FPDL. See Flashlamp-pulsed dye laser Fracture fixation. See Fracture repair Fracture lines, II:1362–1363 Fracture reduction, II:1365, IV:2318 Fracture repair, II:1360–1362, II:1364–1365, IV:2410 Fractures, II:1362–1366, 1363f bone biopsy for, I:538 bone grafts for, I:544 bone growth stimulation for, I:546 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 with burns, I:617 CAT scan for, II:875 from celiac disease, II:682 chest x-ray for, II:749 from child abuse, II:754 coccyx (See Coccyx, injuries to) compound, gangrene from, III:1393 contractures from, II:913, 914 with dislocations and subluxations, II:1083–1084 from dog bites, I:498 from echinococcosis, II:1128 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154, 1155 embolism from, I:355 of eye bones, V:3587 facial, III:2136 vs. facial paralysis, I:462 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 fingertip, II:1332–1333 from Gaucher’s disease, III:2004 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from Heimlich maneuver, III:1565 from human bites, III:1678 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1714 immobilization and, III:1780–1781 jaw (See Jaw fractures) from joint replacement, III:1892 kneecap removal for, III:1928 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1941 low back pain from, III:2032 MRI for, III:2082 with multiple myeloma, III:2239, 2240 from muscular dystrophy, III:2263–2265 nose (See Nasal trauma) orbital (See Orbital fractures) from osteoporosis, IV:2425, 2996 from Paget’s disease, IV:2455 pain from, IV:2459 pelvic, IV:2519–2521 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 skull x-rays for, IV:3082 spinal instrumentation for, IV:3133 sports-related, IV:3145 vs. sprains and strains, IV:3147 stress (See Stress fractures) tooth (See Tooth fractures) traction for, V:3357 wilderness medicine for, V:3562 wound repair and, III:1936 x-rays for, I:556 Fragile X syndrome, II:1366–1369 autism and, II:764 genetic testing for, III:1437 mental retardation from, III:2174 Francis, Thomas Jr., IV:2649 Frangula bark. See Buckthorn Frank breech position, I:594, II:758 Frankincense, for laryngitis, III:1958 Fraser’s syndrome, IV:2661 Frataxin, in Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 Fraternal twins. See Dizygotic twins FRAXA syndrome. See Fragile X syndrome Freckles, IV:3074, 3078 Free association, in psychoanalysis, IV:2761 Free flap. See Surgical flaps Free radicals aging theory, I:70 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:136, 138 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:163, 166 in dementia, II:1024 melanoma and, III:2096 radiation injuries and, IV:2808 Freiberg’s disease, IV:2415–2416 French lavender. See Lavender Freon. See Refrigerants Fresh cell therapy. See Cell therapy 3755 Fresh cell therapy Foot infections from diabetes, II:1053–1055 from mycetoma, III:2275 Foot ringworm. See Athlete’s foot Foot warts. See Plantar warts Football, concussion from, II:878–879, III:2135 Footdrop, I:470, II:734 Footling breech. See Breech birth Footwear bunions from, I:615 corns and calluses from, II:923 hammertoe and, III:1505, 1506 heel spurs from, III:1562 for herniated disk, III:1631 nail injuries from, IV:2309 sciatica from, IV:2965 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 for strongyloidiasis prevention, V:3293 Foramen magnum, I:21 Foramen ovale. See Heart septum Forane. See Isoflurane Forced expiratory volume, in COPD, II:811 Forceps delivery, II:758–759, 1222 Foreign bodies, II:1357–1360 airway obstruction by, III:1999 atelectasis from, I:390, 391 bronchiectasis from, I:596 CAT scan of, II:877 choking from, II:772 corneal abrasion from, II:918 corneal ulcers from, II:921 in the eye, V:3587 eye injuries from, III:2137 hearing loss from, III:1528 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1564–1566 intestinal obstruction from, III:1848 keratitis from, III:1905 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 laryngoscopy for, III:1958 maxillofacial trauma from, III:2135, 2136 osteomyelitis from, IV:2419 perforated eardrum from, IV:2534, 2535 wheezing from, V:3554 in wounds, III:1936, V:3582 Foreign objects. See Foreign bodies Forensic medical examination, IV:2818 Forensic medicine, autopsy and, I:426 Foreskin circumcision and, II:812, 813–814 inflammation of (See Balanitis) Formaldehyde miscarriage from, III:2204 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234 Fort Bragg fever. See Leptospirosis Freud, Sigmund Freud, Sigmund, I:368, IV:2761, 3113, 3116 Freudian dance therapy. See Dance therapy Frey syndrome. See Gustatory sweating Friction massage. See Massage Friedewald formula, for cholesterol tests, III:2008 Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369–1370, III:2221 Frontal encephalocele, II:890 Frontal fractures. See Nasal trauma Frontal lobe Bender-Gestalt test for, I:465 in hypophysectomy, III:1745 Frostbite, II:1370–1373 amputation for, I:157 foot care with, II:1357 with hypothermia, III:1754 wilderness medicine for, V:3562 Frottage, IV:3018 Frotteurism, IV:3018 Fructose in carbohydrates, II:649 lactic acidosis from, III:1945 loading test, III:1621 in semen analysis, IV:2995 urinalysis for, V:3446 Fructose 1-phosphate aldolase. See Aldolase B Fructose intolerance, III:1620–1621 Fanconi’s syndrome from, II:1290, 1291 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 renal tubular acidosis from, IV:2858 Fruit, tapeworms in, V:3240 Fruit sugar intolerance. See Fructose intolerance Fruits contaminated, II:781 with food poisoning, II:1355 fructose intolerance from, III:1620 for hemorrhoids, III:1593, 1594 for hypoglycemia, III:1737 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 FSAD. See Female sexual arousal disorder FSH Klinefelter syndrome and, III:1926 menopause and, III:2159–2160 multiple pregnancy from, III:2248 with premature menopause, IV:2702 FSP. See Fibrin split products FTT. See Failure to thrive Fuchs, Leonhard, III:1617 Fuch’s dystrophy, II:919 Fucosyltransferase, II:992 Fucus vesiculosus. See Bladder wrack Fukuyama type congenital muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267 Full-thickness burns. See Burns 3756 Fulminant hepatitis. See Hepatitis B Fulminant liver failure, III:2028 Fulvicin. See Griseofulvin Fumes, poisoning from, IV:2644 Functional bowel disorder. See Irritable bowel syndrome Functional bowel syndrome. See Irritable bowel syndrome Functional cysts. See Ovarian cysts Functional dyspepsia. See Indigestion Functional heart murmurs. See Heart murmurs Functional incontinence. See Urinary incontinence Functional training. See Feldenkrais method Fundal height, III:1852 Fundoplication, for heartburn, III:1555 Fungal culture vs. blood culture, I:523 for mucormycosis, III:2232 before nail removal, IV:2309 for skin infections, IV:3068 of sputum, IV:3149 Fungal folliculitis. See Folliculitis Fungal infections. See Mycoses Fungal keratitis. See Keratitis Fungi asthma from, I:380 bronchiectasis from, I:596 in chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 corneal ulcers from, II:922 empyema from, II:1175 extrinsic allergic alveolitis from, III:1716 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 mucormycosis from, III:2231 otitis externa from, IV:2431 pneumocystis pneumonia from, IV:2635 prostatitis from, IV:2740 See also Mycoses Fungicides, birth defects from, I:490 Fungizone. See Amphotericin B FUO. See Fever of unknown origin Furadantin. See Nitrofurantoin Furan. See Nitrofurantoin Furazolidone with bupropion, IV:3111 G6PD and, III:1465 for giardiasis, III:1451 with nitrofurantoin, V:3448 for protozoan infections, I:298 Furosemide diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for edema, II:1088 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypercalcemia, III:1697–1698 hypokalemia from, III:1739 hyponatremia from, III:1742 for magnesium poisoning, III:2079 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Furoxone. See Furazolidone Furumoto, Phyllis Lei, IV:2848–2849 Furunculosis, I:13, I:536–538 pustule from, IV:3074 skin culture for, IV:3068 Fused vertebrae. See Coccyx Fusiform aneurysm, I:325, II:697–700 Fusobacterium, III:2134 Futicasone, for asthma, I:120 G G suits, I:427, 428 G6PD. See Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase GABA. See Gamma-aminobutyric acid Gabapentin for convulsions, I:253 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 GAD. See Generalized anxiety disorder Gadjusek, Carleton, II:950 Gadolinium, with MRI, III:2083 Gadolinium enhancement, III:2252 Gag reflex in death, II:1005 from laryngoscopy, III:1959 neurologic examination of, IV:2352 Gagroot. See Lobelia Gaisbock’s syndrome. See Spurious polycythemia Gait acoustic neuroma and, I:29 analysis, in neurologic examination, IV:2350, 2352 bunions from, I:615 with Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 Gaiter berries. See Cramp bark Galactogram. See Ductogram Galactorrhea, III:1375–1376 from pituitary tumors, IV:2607 prolactin test for, IV:2723 Galactosamine-6-sulfatase, III:2230 Galactose in carbohydrates, II:649 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1291 lactose intolerance and, III:1945 urinalysis for, V:3446 Galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase, III:1377 Galactosemia, III:1376–1379 cirrhosis from, II:816 Fanconi’s syndrome and, II:1291 alpha-Galactosidase A, III:2003, 2005 Galactoside beta-galactosidase, III:2004 Galantamine, IV:3000 Galaxy Lyme, III:2060 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for acute leukemia, III:1988 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 for sarcoidosis, IV:2941 Gallop heart rhythm, II:830 Gallstone ileus, II:779, III:1388 Gallstone removal, III:1385–1387, 1386f Gallstones, III:1387–1391, 1389f aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 bowel function and, I:565 cholangitis from, II:774 cholecystectomy for, II:777 cholecystitis from, II:779 cholestasis from, II:783 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790, 791 from Crohn’s disease, II:957 from cystic fibrosis, II:986 endoscopic sphincterotomy for, II:1198 from enterostomies, II:1211 ERCP for, II:1196–1197 with G6PD, III:1464 gallbladder cancer and, III:1379 HRT and, III:1670, 1673 intravenous urography for, III:1855 jaundice from, III:1883, IV:2330 laser surgery for, III:1960 liver function tests for, III:2025, 2027 with methadone, III:2182 nausea from, IV:2325 nuclear medicine scan for, III:1381–1382 from obesity, IV:2374 with opioid analgesics, I:177 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 pancreatitis from, IV:2469 PTHC for, IV:2532, 2533 from pyruvate kinase deficiency, IV:2794 from sickle cell disease, IV:3044 ultrasonography for, I:2 from vitamin C toxicity, V:3523 x-rays for, III:1382, 1383 GALT. See Galactose-1-phosphate uridyl transferase Gambian sleeping sickness. See African trypanosomiasis Gambian trypanosomiasis, IV:3093–3094 Gambling, compulsive, I:51, III:1807–1808 Gamete intrafallopian transfer, III:1809, III:1827, III:1829, 1833 Gamimune. See Gammaglobulins Gamma-aminobutyric acid, II:689 Gamma cameras with bone nuclear medicine scan, I:555 for cardiac blood pool scan, II:655 in MUGA scans, III:2233 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for salivary gland scan, IV:2932 Gamma-glutamyl transferase, III:2024–2027 Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase. See Gamma-glutamyl transferase Gamma knife radiosurgery. See Radiosurgery Gamma rays, II:639 Gamma scintillation cameras. See Gamma cameras Gammagard. See Gammaglobulins Gammaglobulin electrophoresis. See Immunoelectrophoresis Gammaglobulins, III:1391–1392 anaphylaxis from, I:179 for ataxia-telangiectasia, I:388 for chickenpox (See Varicella-zoster immune globulin) for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for common variable immunodeficiency, III:1786 for graft vs. host disease, III:1482 hepatitis C and, III:1602 hives from, III:1642 for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788 for jaundice, III:1883 for lymphocytopenia, III:2070 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747–2748 serum sickness from, IV:3007 for x-linked agammaglobulinemia, III:1786, V:3585 Gan t’sao. See Licorice Ganciclovir for cross infection, III:1675 for cytomegalovirus, II:1000 for encephalitis, II:1179 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for viral infections, I:315, 316, 317 Gandhi, Mahatma, II:1293, V:3485 Ganglion, III:1392, 1392–1393, IV:2340 Ganglion nerve block, III:1380 Ganglioneuroblastoma, II:677 Ganglioneuroma, II:678 Ganglionic blockers, IV:3224 Gangliosides, V:3244 Gangrene, III:1393–1396, 1394 aldolase and, I:100 amputation for, I:157 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from antimigraine agents, I:290, 291 from atherosclerosis, I:394 from Buerger’s disease, I:611 from decubitus ulcer, I:458 from diabetic foot infections, II:1053 from disseminated intravascular coagulation, II:829 3757 Gangrene Galen of Pergamon, III:1616–1617 Galium. See Cleavers (Plant) Galium aparine. See Cleavers (Plant) Gallbladder bile and, II:774 diseases of (See Gallbladder diseases) with duodenal obstruction, II:1110 in empyema, II:1176 with endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1198 in jaundice, III:1881 in liver cancer, III:2019 nuclear medicine scan for, III:1381–1382 perforation of from cholecystitis, II:779 from liver biopsy, III:2018 removal of (See Cholecystectomy) scan of, II:779, III:1381–1382 x-rays of (See Cholecystography; Gallbladder x-rays) Gallbladder cancer, III:1379–1380, III:1381 Gallbladder diseases from campylobacteriosis, II:631 cancer (See Gallbladder cancer) cholecystectomy for, II:777–778 cholecystitis from, II:779 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790 vs. cryptosporidiosis, II:967 dyspepsia from, II:1118 with hormone replacement therapy, III:2160 indigestion from, III:1813 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2013 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 with methadone, III:2182 nuclear medicine scan for, III:1381–1382 with opioid analgesics, I:177 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 from peritonitis, IV:2489 tumors, III:1382, 1383 endoscopic sphincterotomy for, II:1198 nuclear medicine scan for, III:1381–1382 ultrasonography for, I:2 Gallbladder surgery for empyema, II:1177 gallbladder cancer and, III:1379–1380 for gallstone removal, III:1385 Gallbladder x-rays, III:1382–1383 Gallium, III:1383, 1384 Gallium aparine. See Cleavers (Plant) Gallium scan, III:1383–1385, 1384 Gangrene E. coli infections from, II:1235, 1236 with female genital mutilation, II:1307 from flesh-eating disease, II:1336–1337 gas (See Gas gangrene) from hernias, III:1624 intestinal (See Intestinal gangrene) from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 from lack of foot care, II:1357 from leprosy, III:1978 from nasal infections, IV:2312 from peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 from Raynaud disease, IV:2824 from rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 Ganser’s syndrome, II:1277 Gantanol, neutropenia from, IV:2354 Gantrinsin. See Sulfonamides Gantrisin. See Sulfonamides Garamycin. See Gentamicin Garden balm. See Lemon balm Garden heliotrope. See Valerian Garden marigold. See Calendula Garden sage. See Sage Garlic aging and, I:71 for angina pectoris, I:196 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for balanitis, I:440 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for cystitis, II:994 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 drug interations with, II:1103 for folliculitis, II:1352 for genital herpes, III:1443 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for gout, III:1478 for high cholesterol, II:787, 788 for influenza, III:1835 for lead poisoning, III:1968 for lice, III:1995–1996 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Gas, intestinal. See Intestinal gas Gas embolism, II:1009, 1169–1171, III:1396–1397 from blood transfusions, V:3369 from mediastinoscopy, III:2145 recompression treatment for, IV:2826 Gas gangrene, III:1393 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from flesh-eating disease, II:1337 3758 recompression treatment for, IV:2826 Gas poisoning, III:2050 Gas-X. See Simethicone Gasoline delirium from, II:1021 with gastric lavage, IV:3169 Goodpasture’s syndrome from, III:1475 ipecac and, III:1857, 1858 lead in, III:1965 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234 Gastrectomy, III:1397–1399, 1398f for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472 subtotal, with vagotomy, V:3470 with ulcer surgery, V:3428 Gastric acid antacids for, I:218 antiulcer drugs for, I:313–314 with cholinergic agents, II:794–795 determination of, III:1399–1401 with gastrinomas, III:1403 with giardiasis, III:1450 in heartburn, III:1553 in hiatal hernias, III:1624 tests for, III:1399–1401 vagotomy for, V:3470 Gastric acidity determination, III:1399–1401 Gastric adenocarcinomas, III:1397 Gastric analysis. See Gastric acidity determination Gastric antacids. See Antacids Gastric bypass. See Jejunoileal bypass Gastric bypass surgery, IV:2379 Gastric cancer. See Stomach cancer Gastric emptying delayed, IV:2470 scan for, III:1401–1402 Gastric feeding tubes. See Nasoenteral tubes Gastric lavage, IV:3169–3170 for botulism, I:562 for drug overdose, II:1106 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 for poisoning, IV:2645 Gastric lymphomas, III:1397 Gastric sarcomas. See Leiomyosarcomas Gastric stapling. See Surgical stapling Gastric ulcer. See Peptic ulcer; Stomach ulcer Gastric ulcers, I:174, 175 Gastrin, III:2236 Gastrinomas, III:1403–1405, IV:2471–2472 basal gastric secretion test for, III:1400 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 pernicious anemia from, IV:2558 proton pump inhibitors for, I:314 ulcer surgery and, V:3428 Gastritis, III:1405–1408 basal gastric secretion test for, III:1400 bile reflux, III:1399 dyspepsia from, II:1118 heartburn from, III:1553 from Helicobacter pylori, III:1566 vs. Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 pernicious anemia from, I:181 Gastroduodenostomy, V:3428 Gastroenteritis, III:1408–1410 from adenoviruses, I:57 barium enema for, I:449 dehydration from, II:1017 from E. coli, II:1235 from escherichia coli, III:1580 infantile (See Infantile gastroenteritis) nausea from, IV:2325 from rotaviruses, IV:2922 from salmonella food poisoning, IV:2936 small intestine biopsy for, IV:3096 from XLA, V:3585 from yersiniosis, V:3592 Gastroenterology, IV:3052 Gastroenterostomy, V:3428 Gastroesophageal reflux, III:1553 antacids for, I:218 cough from, II:941–942 drugs for, I:272 dyspnea from, IV:3036, 3037 esophageal cancer from, II:1240 FOBT for, II:1302 indigestion as, III:1813, 1815 proton pump inhibitors for, I:314 from TEF, V:3352 tests for, II:1242 upper GI series for, V:3438 See also Heartburn Gastrointestinal bleeding. See Gastrointestinal hemorrhage Gastrointestinal cancer, V:3413 Gastrointestinal diseases Alexander technique for, I:103 from antidepressants, I:257 aromatherapy for, I:348, 349 Behcet’s syndrome, I:459–460 E. coli infections from, II:1235 EGD for, II:1246 FOBT for, II:1302 hemorrhage (See Gastrointestinal hemorrhage) with rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900, 2901 with septic shock, IV:3005 starvation from, IV:3161 stool culture and, IV:3171 stool O & P test and, IV:3175 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Gastrostomy tube insertion. See Gastrostomy Gated cardiac blood pool imaging. See Cardiac blood pool scan Gatifloxacin, for bacterial infections, II:1344–1345 Gatorade. See Oral rehydration solutions Gattefossé, René-Maurice, I:348 Gaucher, Philippe, III:1412 Gaucher’s disease, III:1412–1414, III:1421, 1422, 2003–2004, 2005 ACE test for, I:205 acid phosphatase test for, I:23 Gay and lesbian health, III:1414–1417 GB hepatitis agents, III:1609 GBM tumors. See Astrocytomas GBS. See Streptococcus agalactiae GDS. See Geriatric Depression Scale Ge gan. See Kudzu Gelfoam, in ear surgery, II:1123 Gelling, from polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2666 Gelsemium. See Yellow jasmine Gemcitabine, for pancreatic cancer, IV:2476 Gemfibrozil for atherosclerosis, I:396 for high cholesterol, II:787, 789, 790, 791 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 Gender identity disorder, III:1417–1418 gay and lesbian health and, III:1416 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 sex change surgery for, IV:3011 Gender stereotypes, I:212 Gene mutation. See Mutation Gene pool, III:1424 Gene therapy, III:1419–1424 for adenosine deaminase deficiency, III:1420 for AIDS, III:1421–1422 for autoimmune diseases, I:424–425 for brain tumors, I:573 for cancer, II:639 chromosome analysis in, III:1419 CTFR gene and, III:1421 for cystic fibrosis, II:989, III:1419 DNA analysis and, III:1419, 1420–1423, III:1421 ethics and, III:1423–1424 for Gaucher’s disease, III:1421 gene pool and, III:1424 for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 Human Genome Project and, III:1422 for Huntington disease, III:1422 for liver cancer, III:2021 for lymphocytopenia, III:2070 for muscular dystrophy, III:2267 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 for porphyrias, IV:2674 retroviruses in, III:1419–1420 for SCID, IV:3010 viral vectors in, III:1419–1420 General adaptation syndrome, III:1424–1425 General anesthesia, I:185–189 for appendectomy, I:338 ARDS from, I:69 in arthroscopy, I:366 atelectasis from, I:390 for bone biopsy, I:539 for brain biopsy, I:568 for catheter ablation, II:680 central nervous system depressants as, II:688 for heart transplantation, III:1546 with laparoscopy, III:1948, 1949 with laparotomy, II:1132–1133 for skin resurfacing, IV:3080 for surgery, III:1427 withdrawal syndrome from, V:3573 General surgery. See Surgery Generalized anxiety disorder, I:323, III:1428–1429, IV:2768 Generalized disease of the newborn, II:1212 Generalized peroxisomal disorders. See Peroxisome biogenesis disorders Generalized pustular psoriasis, IV:2756 Genes, in pharmacogenetics, IV:2573–2574 See also specific genes Genetic counseling, III:1429–1431 for achondroplasia, I:22 for adrenoleukodystrophy, I:67 for albinism, I:91 for birth defect prevention, I:493 for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, II:735 for coagulation disorders, II:829 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:886 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for Down syndrome, II:1100, 1101 for familial polyposis, II:1286 for Gaucher’s disease, III:1413 genetic testing and, III:1432 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 immunologic diseases and, III:1787 for lipidoses, III:2006 for Marfan syndrome, III:2118 for melanoma, III:2099 for nail-patella syndrome, IV:2308–2309 for neurofibromatosis, IV:2346 for peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561–2562 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2578 for platelet function disorders, IV:2626 3759 Genetic counseling upper GI series for, V:3438 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 x-rays for, III:1923 Gastrointestinal hemorrhage from alcoholism, I:96 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 gastric lavage for, IV:3169 GI bleeding studies for, III:1449 from hemorrhagic fevers, III:1590, 1591, 1592 iron deficiency anemia from, III:1860 iron tests for, III:1863 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 from Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2102–2103 from NSAIDs, I:175 with rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 Gastrointestinal motility with barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 disorders of gastric emptying scan for, III:1401 indigestion from, III:1813 Gastrointestinal obstruction. See Intestinal obstruction Gastrointestinal surgery, IV:2319–2320 Gastrointestinal system abnormalities of in Down syndrome, II:1099 in graft vs. host disease, III:1481 with antihistamines, I:278 with beriberi, I:479 in cystic fibrosis, II:985–986 diseases of (See Gastrointestinal diseases) in gonorrhea, III:1472, 1473 hemorrhaging (See Gastrointestinal hemorrhage) in mastocytosis, III:2132 with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 paralysis, III:2104 x-rays of, V:3438 Gastrointestinal tularemia, V:3411 Gastrojejunostomy, V:3428 Gastroparesis gastric emptying scan for, III:1402 sildenafil citrate for, IV:3052 Gastroplasty, IV:2379 Gastroscopy, III:1426 for duodenal obstruction, II:1111 for tube compression, V:3400 for vagotomy, V:3470 Gastrostomy, III:1410–1412, 1411f for amytrophic lateral sclerosis, I:166 bacteremia from, I:436 for enteral nutrition, V:3401 for laryngeal cancer, III:1952–1953 with muscular dystrophy, III:2267 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 Genetic counseling for Prader-Willi syndrome, IV:2689 prepregnancy, IV:2712 for retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2881 for SCID, IV:3010 for sickle cell disease, IV:3044, 3046 for Tay-Sachs disease, III:2005 XLA and, V:3586 Genetic damage, IV:2807 Genetic diseases. See Hereditary diseases Genetic disorders gene therapy for, III:1419–1424 genetic counseling for, III:1429–1431 genetic testing for, III:1431–1439 heterozygote advantage in, II:985 See also specific names of diseases Genetic interpretations, in psychoanalysis, IV:2762 Genetic linkage. See Linkage (Genetics) Genetic messages, III:2263 Genetic screening. See Genetic testing Genetic testing, III:1431–1439, 1433, IV:2712 for Alport’s syndrome, I:131, 132 for cancer, II:634, IV:2441 for Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, II:735 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885, 886 for cystic fibrosis, II:984–985, 987–988 DNA composition and, III:1432–1433 for Down syndrome, II:1099 for familial polyposis, II:1286 for fragile X syndrome, II:1368 genetic, III:1435–1436 genetic mapping and, III:2297 for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467–1468 for hemoglobinopathies, III:1578 for Huntington disease, III:1682–1683 for movement disorders, III:2222 for multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2237 for muscular dystrophy, III:2265 for myotonic dystrophy, III:2302 for neutropenia, IV:2354 for periodic paralysis, IV:2544 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 for peroxisomal disorders, IV:2562 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2578 with polycythemia vera, IV:2659 for prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2725 for pseudoxanthoma elasticum, IV:2755 for recurrent miscarriage, IV:2837 for renal tubular acidosis, IV:2858 for retinoblastoma, IV:2884–2885 for sarcomas, IV:2943 3760 for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, V:3570 for Wolman disease, III:2006 for XLA, V:3586 See also Chromosome analysis; DNA analysis Genital cancer, III:1483 Genital herpes, III:1439–1444, 1441, 1442, IV:3020, 3022, 3023 cesarean section with, II:724, 759 vs. chancroid, II:729 keratitis from, III:1904 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 in men, III:2167 pap smear for, IV:2485 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 perinatal, IV:2540–2543 sitz bath for, IV:3061 Genital surgery, I:190 Genital ulcers with Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 from chancroid, II:729 from granuloma inguinale, III:1483 lymphogranuloma venereum from, III:2071 Genital warts, I:172–173, III:1444, 1444–1445, V:3548 colposcopy for, II:864 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 interferons for, III:1792 in men, III:2167 pap smear for, IV:2485 from papillomavirus, IV:3020, 3022, 3023 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 vs. penile cancer, IV:2530 from rape and sexual assault, IV:2817 from vulvar cancer, V:3536 Genitalia burns of, I:617 elephantiasis of, II:1166 female (See Female genitalia) in gonorrhea, III:1472 in granuloma inguinale, III:1482–1483 injuries of, in child abuse, II:754 with lice, III:1995 lichen planus of, III:1997 with lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071–2072 male (See Male genitalia) mutilation of (See Female genital mutilation) Genograms, in family therapy, II:1289 Genotypic drug resistance tests, I:86 Genralized seizures, IV:2985 Gentamicin sulfate, V:3466 Gentamicins, I:150, 151 with creatinine test, II:949 for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 Fanconi’s syndrome from, II:1290 hearing loss from, III:1528 for neonatal meningitis, II:1237 for plague, IV:2616 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 with tacrolimus, III:1798 Gentamycin. See Gentamicins Gentian, for anemia, I:184 Gentian violet, I:270, 271 Gentiana lutea. See Gentian Genu valgus with heel spurs, III:1562 from vitamin D deficiency, V:3515 Geophagia, IV:2595–2596 Geranium for dizziness, II:1096 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 for sore throats, IV:3120 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for strep throat, IV:3179 Geranium maculatum. See Spotted cranesbill Gerard, John, III:1617 Geriatric Depression Scale, II:1034 Geriatrics. See Senior’s health Germ cell tumors, II:796–797, V:3256 German chamomile. See Chamomile German measles. See Rubella Germinoma, I:106 Germinomas. See Germ cell tumors Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease, II:951, 952–953 Gestalt therapy, III:1445–1447 in group therapy, III:1485 movement therapy and, III:2226 Gestational age, I:127, 128 abortion and, I:9, 12 amniotic fluid and, IV:2664 with multiple pregnancy, III:2247 prematurity and, IV:2707 Gestational diabetes, II:1048–1049, III:1447–1449 vs. amylophagia, IV:2596 antenatal tests for, I:219 antepartum tests with, I:221 blood glucose tests for, I:529 cesarean section with, II:725 with DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 in high risk pregnancy, III:1632 neonatal jaundice from, III:1883 testing for, IV:2697 Geste antagoniste, V:3340 Gestrinone, for endometriosis, II:1194 GFD. See Gluten-free diet GH. See Growth hormones Ghasard, lead poisoning from, III:1965 GHb. See Glycosylated hemoglobin test GHRH. See Somatotropin-releasing hormone GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 vs. bruxism, I:609 from gastroesophageal reflux, III:1553 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 prevention of, IV:2406 Gingivostomatitis, II:845 Ginkgo, III:1452–1454, III:1453 for ADHD, I:413 aging and, I:71 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:139–140, II:1026 for angiomas, I:496 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 drug interations with, II:1103 for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 for impotence, III:1806 for ischemia, III:1871 for menopause, III:2162 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 for otitis media, IV:2435 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for tinnitus, V:3323 Ginkgo biloba. See Ginkgo Ginseng for Alzheimer’s disease, I:140 for anemia, I:184 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 drug interations with, II:1103 for impotence, III:1806 for menopause, III:2162 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 Siberian (See Siberian ginseng) Ginseng Evaluation Program, III:1457 Glandular cancer, II:1124 Glandular therapy. See Cell therapy Glandular tissue, III:1497 Glandular tularemia, V:3411 Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia, IV:2626 Glare test, for cataracts, II:674 Glasgow 7-point skin cancer scale, III:2096 Glasgow Coma Scale, II:868, III:1521 Glasses, eye. See Eyeglasses Glatiramer acetate as immunosuppressive agent, III:1796 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252–2253 Glaucoma, III:1457–1461 with antiangina agents, I:230 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 with antihistamines, I:278 antioxidants for, I:70 with benzodiazepines, I:232, 467 beta blockers for, I:474 bronchodilators with, I:601 cataracts and, II:672, 673 cholinergic agents for, II:794, 795 color blindness from, II:860 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with decongestants, II:1011 from diabetes mellitus, II:1052 with dicyclomine, I:309 from dominant inheritance, I:491 eye examination and, II:1262, III:2166 hyperopia and, III:1712 from hyphema, III:1728 with hypotonic duodenography, III:1759 from keratitis, III:1904 laser eye surgery and, IV:2586 laser surgery for, III:1960 from Marfan syndrome, III:2116 with motion sickness, III:2219 optic atrophy from, IV:2398 with prochlorperazine, I:293 radial keratotomy and, IV:2804 retinal artery occlusion with, IV:2875, 2876 retinal vein occlusion with, IV:2879 senior’s health and, IV:2997, 2999 from steroids, I:404 with sulfonamides, IV:3216 trabeculectomy and, V:3350, 3351 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 ultrasonography for, II:1259 uveitis and, V:3462 Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor gene, III:1635 Glial cells, tumors of. See Gliomas Glimepiride, for diabetes mellitus, I:262, II:1049 Glioblastoma multiforme tumors. See Astrocytomas Gliomas, I:570, II:632 See also Cancer; Mixed gliomas Glipizide for diabetes mellitus, I:262 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:270 Global aphasia, I:334 Global Polio Eradication Initiative, IV:2650 Globin, in hemoglobin, III:1576 Globoid cell leukodystrophy. See Krabbe’s disease Globulins, protein components test and, IV:2745–2746 Globus pallidus in movement disorders, III:2222 Parkinson disease and, IV:2502–2503 Glomerular filtration rate, III:1705 Glomeruli in allergic purpura, I:110 in chronic kidney failure, II:806 in hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1775–1776 in nephrotic syndrome, IV:2334–2335 in nephrotoxic injury, IV:2336–2337 3761 Glomeruli GI bleeding scans. See GI bleeding studies GI bleeding studies, III:1449–1450 Giant cell arteritis. See Temporal arteritis Giant cell carcinoma, III:2043 Giant cell myocarditis, II:897 Giant cell thyroiditis. See Subacute thyroiditis Giant diverticula, II:1091 Giardia cryptosporidiosis from, II:967 diarrhea from, II:1066 travelers diarrhea from, V:3379 Giardia lamblia, III:1450 Giardiasis, III:1450–1452, 1451f antihelminthic drugs for, I:273 antiprotozoal drugs for, I:298 indigestion from, III:1813 small intestine biopsy for, IV:3095–3096 Gibralter fever. See Brucellosis GID. See Gender identity disorder GIFT. See Gamete intrafallopian transfer Gigantism, I:32–34, III:1488, 1490 Gilbert, William, III:2080 Gilbert’s disease, III:1883 Gilchrist’s disease. See Blastomycosis Gilles de la Tourette’s disease. See Tourette syndrome Gindler, Elsa, III:2226 Ginger for atherosclerosis, I:396 for bursitis, I:621 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for costochondritis, II:940 for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for frostbite, II:1372 for heartburn, III:1555 for IBS, III:1867 for measles, III:2140 for motion sickness, III:2219 for nausea, II:765, IV:2326 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for rubella, IV:2927 for sore throats, IV:3120 Gingerols, for motion sickness, III:2219 Gingiva bleeding of from malnutrition, III:2104 from pregnancy, IV:2696 cancer of, III:1516 with lichen planus, III:1997 from partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507 tumors of, III:1897 Gingivitis, IV:2545–2546, IV:2547, IV:2547–2548, IV:2548 Glomerulonephritis Glomerulonephritis, III:1461–1463, 1462, IV:2333–2334 acute kidney failure from, I:44 acute poststreptococcal (See Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis) beta2-microglobulin test for, I:473 chronic kidney failure from, II:806 with creatinine test, II:949 from Goodpasture’s syndrome, I:422, III:1475 from impetigo, III:1802 from scarlet fever, IV:2951 streptococcal antibody tests for, IV:3180, 3181, 3182 urinalysis for, V:3445 Glossitis, III:1860 Glossopharyngeal neuralgia, IV:2339 Glottis, III:1515, 1950, 1952 Glucagon electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 in glucose production, III:1734 with growth hormone tests, III:1488 for hypoglycemia, III:1736 with hypotonic duodenography, III:1759 lactic acidosis from, III:1945 test of, III:1748 with upper GI series, V:3438 Glucagonoma, IV:2471 Glucocerebrosidase. See Glucosylceramidase Glucocerebroside. See Glucosylceramidase Glucocorticoid deficiency, II:936 Glucocorticoids, II:935, 936, 937 for adrenal virilism, I:62 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for myelofibrosis, III:2282 with periodic paralysis, IV:2544 for pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 for thyroiditis, V:3320 Glucocorticord hormones, II:971 Glucocorticosteroids. See Glucocorticoids Glucometers, I:529 Glucosamine, for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 Glucosamine-chondroitin sulfate, II:940 Glucose blood (See Blood glucose) in carbohydrates, II:649 for coma, II:868 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 in fight or flight response, II:677 in glycogen storage diseases, III:1465 with growth hormone tests, III:1488 3762 for periodic paralysis, IV:2545 urinalysis for, V:3446 Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency, III:1466 Glucose-6-phosphatase translocase, III:1466 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase antimalarials and, I:287 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 jaundice from, III:1881 with nalidixic acid, V:3448 with nitrofurantoin, V:3448 with sulfonamides, IV:3217 Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, III:1463–1465 Glucose intolerance, III:1735 Glucose loading test. See Growth hormones, suppression test of Glucose test strips, II:1055 Glucose tolerance test for Atkins diet, I:402 for gestational diabetes, III:1448 for hypoglycemia, III:1736 for PCOS, IV:2655 for retinal vein occlusion, IV:2879 alpha-Glucosidases, III:1466 Glucosylceramidase, III:1412, 1413, 2004 Glucotrol. See Glipizide Glue ear. See Otitis media, with effusion Glukos riza. See Licorice Glutamate, I:163–164, 165 Glutamic acid, V:3514 Gluten enteropathy. See Celiac disease Gluten-free diet, II:681, 683 Gluten sensitive enteropathy. See Celiac disease Gluteus maximus flap. See Surgical flaps Glyburide for diabetes mellitus, II:1051 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:270 Glycated hemoglobin. See Glycosylated hemoglobin test Glycerin. See Glycerol Glycerine. See Glycerol Glycerol in bowel training, I:565 for hemorrhoids, I:275 as laxative, III:1964 Glyceryl trinitrate. See Nitroglycerin Glycine, V:3514 Glycogen in blood glucose levels, I:528 metabolism of, III:1465 Glycogen brancher enzyme deficiency, III:1466 Glycogen debranching enzyme deficiency, III:1466 Glycogen phosphorylase deficiency, III:1466 Glycogen storage disease type III, III:1466 Glycogen storage diseases, III:1465–1468 cirrhosis from, II:816 enzymes for, III:1465 Fanconi’s syndrome from, II:1290, 1291 lactic acid test for, III:1945 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 Glycogenolysis, III:1465, 1466–1467 Glycogenoses. See Glycogen storage diseases Glycolic acid for acne, I:26 for skin resurfacing, IV:3080 Glycolysis, IV:2793 Glycoproteins, III:1701 Glycopyrrolate, III:1842 Glycosaminoglycans, III:2227–2228 Glycosuria protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2744 urinalysis for, V:3446 Glycosylated hemoglobin test, III:1468–1470 Glycyrrhetinic acid, II:1154 Glycyrrhiza. See Licorice Glycyrrhiza glabra. See Licorice Glycyrrhizinic acid, for genital herpes, III:1442 Glynase. See Glyburide GnRH. See Gonadorelin GnRHa. See Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists Goeckerman treatment, V:3436 Goiter, III:1470, 1470–1471 from iodine deficiency, III:2190, 2192, 2193 from iodine toxicity, III:2194 from malnutrition, III:2104 superior vena cava syndrome from, IV:3222 thyroid biopsy for, V:3304 thyroid hormones for, V:3313 thyroid scan for, V:3314 thyroid ultrasound for, V:3316 thyroidectomy and, III:1724, V:3317 Gold in brachytherapy, IV:2815 for fillings, V:3334 seborrheic dermatitis from, II:1037 Gold antirheumatic agents psoriatic arthritis and, IV:2759 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, 306–307, IV:2901 Gold salts. See Gold antirheumatic agents Gold sodium, for TMJ, V:3250 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 in men, III:2167 myocarditis from, III:2289 vs. nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 orchitis from, IV:2408 pelvic exam for, IV:2517, 2519 penicillin for, IV:2527 pharyngeal, IV:3118 proctitis from, IV:2719 prostatitis from, IV:2740 from rape and sexual assault, IV:2817, 2818 stomatitis with, IV:3170 trichomoniasis with, V:3387 Good Health Magazine, V:3485 Goodheart, George G., I:343, 344, III:1924 Goodpasture’s syndrome, I:422, 423, III:1475–1476 Gordon syndrome, IV:2661 Gotu kola aging and, I:71 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:140 Gout, III:1476–1478, 1477f with acute kidney failure, I:44 with anticancer agents, I:248 with antidiarrhea drugs, I:265 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311 bladder stones with, I:510 vs. bunions, I:615 bursitis from, I:620 with diuretics, II:1089 drugs for, III:1478–1481 edema from, II:1135 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 hyperuricemia and, I:281–282 infectious arthritis with, III:1820 kidney stones and, III:1917 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 osteoarthritis from, IV:2412 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1890 uric acid tests for, V:3442 Gout suppressants. See Antigout drugs Grace of God. See St. John’s wort Grade III astrocytomas. See Astrocytomas Grade IV astrocytomas. See Astrocytomas Graduated compression stockings, II:1171 Graft closure, II:928 Graft rejection after corneal transplant, II:920 after heart transplant, III:1547 Graft vs. host disease, III:1481–1482 aplastic anemia from, I:337 from blood transfusions autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 toxic epidermal necrolysis from, V:3345 Graft vs. leukemia, III:1482 Grain beetle infections, V:3240 Gram-negative bacteria aminoglycosides for, I:150–151 cultures for, V:3578 yersiniosis from, V:3592 Gram’s stain, I:150 with blood culture, I:523 for diphtheria, II:1078 for gangrene, III:1394 for gonorrhea, III:1472, 1473 for inclusion conjunctivitis, III:1811 for infectious arthritis, III:1820 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for skin cultures, IV:3068 for sputum cultures, IV:3149 for wound cultures, V:3578 Granadilla. See Passionflower Grand mal seizures, IV:2985, 2988–2989 Grandiosity, in delusions, II:1023 Granisetron, for nausea, II:642, 643, 644, 742 Granular conjunctivitis. See Trachoma Granular nodes, from middle ear ventilation, III:2305 Granulation tissue in granuloma inguinale, III:1482–1483 from lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071 Granules, in allergies, I:122 Granulocytes in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 blood donation and, I:526 in chronic leukemia, III:1990 laboratory tests for, III:1985 in pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 Granulocytopenia. See Neutropenia Granulocytosis, III:1993 Granuloma inguinale, III:1442, III:1482–1484 Granulomas Addison’s disease from, I:53 bone marrow aspiration for, I:549 eosinophilic, III:1638 from extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1716 prostatitis from, IV:2740 from sarcoidosis, IV:2939 Granulomatous disease, IV:2533 Granulomatous ileitis, I:161 Granulomatous myocarditis. See Giant cell myocarditis Granulomatous reaction, IV:2954 Granulomatous thymoma. See Thymoma Granulomatous thyroiditis. See Subacute thyroiditis Granulomatous uveitis, V:3461 3763 Granulomatous uveitis Gold sodium thiomalate, I:305 Gold therapy, for Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2852 Goldbloom. See Calendula Golden marquerite. See Chamomile Golden thread, for malaria, III:2090 Goldenseal for abscesses, I:14 for athlete’s foot, I:399 for balanitis, I:440 for canker sores, II:648 for carbuncle, I:537 for contact dermititis, II:910 for cystitis, II:994 for folliculitis, II:1352 for furunculosis, I:537 for gastritis, III:1407 for influenza, III:1835 for malaria, III:2090 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for otitis media, IV:2435 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for sinusitis, IV:3059 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for tonsillitis, V:3328 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 Golds. See Calendula Golfer’s elbow. See Tennis elbow GoLytley. See Enema Gonadorelin, for hypopituitarism, III:1749 Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists for endometriosis, II:1194 for precocious puberty, IV:2691 for uterine fibroids, V:3459–3460 for in vitro fertilization, III:1809 Gonadotropins hypopituitarism and, III:1746, 1747 multiple pregnancy from, III:2248 in puberty, IV:2772, 2773 in undescended testes, V:3437 Gonads. See Testicles Gonal-F. See Follitropin alfa Gonic. See Human chorionic gonadotropin Goniometer, for contractures, II:913, 914 Gonioscopy, for glaucoma, III:1459 Gonorrhea, III:1471–1475, IV:3020–3021, 3022 cephalosporins for, II:692 cervicitis with, II:723 condom use and, II:881, 882, IV:3023 conjunctivitis from, II:903 ectopic pregnancy and, II:1131 erythromycins for, II:1232 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 Grapefruit juice Grapefruit juice with calcium channel blockers, II:628 drug interactions with, II:1102, 1104 Grapefruit seed extract, IV:2391 Graphite, for tinea, IV:2909 Grapple plant. See Devil’s claw Graves’ disease, I:422, 423, III:1724 exophthalmos from, II:1252 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 long-acting thyroid stimulator and, V:3312 optic atrophy from, IV:2399 triiodothyronine levels and, V:3310, 3312 See also Hyperthyroidism Gravity, aviation medicine for, I:427 Gravity infusion, III:1856 Great Britain, foot and mouth disease in, III:1506 Great morel. See Belladonna Great mullein. See Mullein Greater plantain. See Plantain Greater skullcap. See Skullcap Green clay, for contact dermititis, II:910 Green color blindness, II:859 Green tea for colon cancer, II:853 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1648 for rectal cancer, IV:2832 Greenstick fracture. See Fractures Greig cephalopolysyndactyly, IV:2661 Grepafloxacin, I:258 Greta, lead poisoning from, III:1965 Grief. See Bereavement Grifulvin. See Griseofulvin Grinder, John, IV:2349 Grinding teeth. See Bruxism Grippe. See Influenza Gris-PEG. See Griseofulvin Griseofulvin for folliculitis, II:1352 for lichen planus, III:1997 for onychomycosis, IV:2390–2391 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 serum sickness from, IV:3008 for tinea, IV:2909 Groenblad-Strandberg-Touraine syndrome. See Pseudoxanthoma elasticum Groin ringworm. See Tinea Grönblad-Strandberg-Touraine syndrome, IV:2753–2755 Ground itch. See Cutaneous larva migrans Ground raspberry. See Goldenseal Ground squirrels. See Squirrels Group A streptococci. See Streptococcus pyogenes 3764 Group B streptococci. See Streptococcus agalactiae Group C streptococcus. See Streptococcal infections Group D streptococcus. See Streptococcal infections Group G streptococcus. See Streptococcal infections Group therapy, III:1484–1487, 1486 after amputation, I:159 for anorexia nervosa, I:212 for anxiety, I:321 art therapy and, I:368 for binge eating disorder, I:481 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 for children, II:764 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 in Gestalt therapy, III:1446 in human potential movement, III:1677 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for postpartum depression, IV:2682 for psychosocial disorders, IV:2768 for PTSD, IV:2686 for self mutilation, IV:2994 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 for speech disorders, IV:3124 for substance abuse, IV:3210 Growth alkaline phosphatase and, I:106 calcium levels and, III:1713 in precocious puberty, IV:2691 in puberty, IV:2772 sex hormones and, III:1738 thyroxine regulation of, III:1756 XLA and, V:3586 Growth disorders from acute kidney failure, I:44 from anorexia nervosa, I:212 from anticonvulsants, I:490 from chronic kidney failure, II:806 from congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 from congenital heart disease, II:900 from cutis laxa, II:978 from diarrhea, II:1065 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 fetal, III:1851–1853, IV:2664 from fetal alcohol syndrome, I:490 from fragile X syndrome, II:1368 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 from hemoglobinopathies, III:1577, 1578 from hookworm disease, III:1668 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from kidney failure, I:44, II:806 from lead poisoning, III:1966 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 from malnutrition, III:2104 from necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 from nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 from pituitary tumors, IV:2607 from radiation therapy, I:574 from rubella, V:3339 from SCID, IV:3010 from sickle cell disease, IV:3043 from starvation, IV:3161, 3162 from steroids, I:383 from thyroxin, III:1470 Growth factors. See Growth substances Growth hormone deficiency, III:1746, 1747 Growth hormone-releasing hormone. See Somatotropin-releasing hormone Growth hormone tests, III:1487–1490 for corticotropin hormone deficiency, III:1748 for panhypopituitarism, III:1748 somatotropin-releasing hormone, III:1748 Growth hormone therapy for growth hormone deficiency, III:1749 with growth hormone tests, III:1487 for pituitary dwarfism, IV:2604 Growth hormones, I:32–34, IV:2604, 2605–2606 in glucose production, III:1734 protein components test and, IV:2746 suppression test of, III:1489 tests of (See Growth hormone tests) Growth substances for cancer, II:636, 639, IV:2354 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from, II:951 for debridement, II:1008 insulin-like (See Insulin-like growth factor) for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2281 neuroendocrine tumors and, IV:2343 Guaiac test strips, II:1302 GuaiCough. See Guaifenesin Guaifed. See Guaifenesin Guaifenesin, II:942, II:1253–1254 Guanethidine, V:3484 Guanethidine monosulfate, I:261 Guarana seed, for drug addictions, II:833 Gubapentin, for mania, III:2113 Guelder rose. See Cramp bark Guggal gum. See Myrrh Guggal resin. See Myrrh Gugulipid, for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 Gui zhi fu ling wan, IV:2656 Guide dogs, V:3511 Guided imagery, III:1490–1492 for AIDS, I:81 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for brain tumors, I:573 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 laparoscopic, III:1947, 1949 for ovarian cancer, IV:2442 for ovarian cysts, IV:2446 Gynecomastia, III:1497–1498 breast reduction for, I:590 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012 Gyromitra poisoning, III:2268 H H. influenzae type b vaccine. See Hib vaccine H. pylori. See Helicobacter pylori H type fistulas, V:3351, 3352 H2 blockers. See Histamine H2 antagonists H2 receptor antagonists. See Histamine H2 antagonists H63D gene, III:1574 Habitrol. See Smoking cessation drugs Habitual abortion. See Recurrent miscarriage HACE. See High altitude cerebral edema Haemophilus, I:436 Haemophilus ducreyi, II:729 Haemophilus influenzae cellulitis from, II:684 empyema from, II:1175 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 mastoiditis from, III:2134 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 otitis media from, IV:2433 sputum culture for, IV:3150 type b, meningitis from, III:2154, 2155, 2157 vaccination for, V:3465 Haemophilus influenzae type b, III:1586 epiglottitis from, II:1220 infections from, III:1586 Hag’s taper. See Mullein Hahnemann, Samuel, III:1618, 1656, 1659, 1663–1664, III:1665 Hair analysis for heavy metal poisoning, III:1560–1561 for substance abuse, IV:3209 body (See Body hair) fungal infections of, III:1929 lanugo, I:212 with lice, III:1994 men and, III:2165 menopause and, III:2160 transplants for (See Hair transplantation) Hair dyes salivary gland tumors from, IV:2933 with sunscreens, IV:3221 Hair follicles GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in acne, I:226 in hirsutism, III:1637 implants, III:1499 keratosis pilaris and, III:1906 Hair grafting. See Hair transplantation Hair loss. See Alopecia Hair transplantation, I:126, III:1499–1501, 1500f, 1960 Hairbulb pigmentation test, I:90 Hairy cell leukemia, III:1501–1503, 1502 interferon-alpha for, III:1792 laboratory tests for, III:1985 Hairy leukoplakia, I:77, 79 Halcion. See Triazolam Haldol. See Haloperidol Halitosis. See Bad breath Hallopeau’s acrodermatitis. See Acrodermatitis continua Hallucinations, III:1503–1505 from anoxia, I:217 antimalarials and, I:286 from benzodiazepines, I:467 from bipolar disorder, I:486 from conversion disorder, IV:3114 from decongestants, II:1012 from delirium, II:1020 with delusions, II:1022 from dementia, II:1025 from dronabinol, II:645 from fluoroquinolones, II:1346 from hypocalcemia, III:1732 from manganese toxicity, III:2195 in mania, III:2112 mental status examination for, III:2177, 2178 from migraine, III:2187 from mushrooms, III:2268 narcolepsy and, IV:3087 neurologic examination for, IV:2351 from opioid analgesics, I:178 polysomnography and, IV:2668 with psychosis, IV:2765 with schizoaffective disorder, IV:2956 from schizophrenia, IV:2958 Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder. See Flashbacks Hallucinogens, III:1504 abuse of, III:1416, IV:3207, 3208–3209 with cystoscopy, II:996 delirium from, II:1021 LSD as, III:2073–2074 psychosis from, IV:2765 substance abuse and, IV:3207, 3208 Hallux in bunions, I:614 in osteoarthritis, IV:2414 Hallux valgus, I:614–616, I:615 Halofantrine, for malaria, III:2090 Haloperidol for bipolar disorder, I:488 3765 Haolperidol for canker sores, II:648 for childbirth, II:761 for cocaine addiction, II:833 for dysmenorrhea, II:1118 for endometrial cancer, II:1191 for endometriosis, II:1194 for insomnia, III:1845 for kidney stones, III:1918 for liver cancer, III:2021 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for polymyositis, IV:2668 for retinoblastoma, IV:2888 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for stress reduction, IV:3189 for substance abuse, IV:3209 for tension headache, V:3255 Guillain-Barré syndrome, I:422, 424, III:1492–1493, IV:2549–2554 acute motor paralysis and, IV:2550 vs. arsenic poisoning, IV:2553 vs. botulism, I:560 from campylobacteriosis, II:630 cerebrospinal fluid analysis for, II:706 chest physical therapy for, II:745 electromyography for, II:1160 from enteroviruses, II:1212 from influenza vaccine, III:1836 with Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2395 paralysis from, IV:2491–2492 plasmapheresis for, IV:2619 with vaccines, V:3466 Guilt from mood disorders, III:2216 premature ejaculation from, IV:2699 Guinea worm infection, III:1493–1495 Gulf War syndrome, III:1495–1497 Gullet. See Esophagus Gum. See Myrrh Gum care. See Oral hygiene Gum disease. See Gingivitis Gum plant. See Comfrey Gumma, IV:3227 Gums. See Gingiva Gunshot wounds gangrene from, III:1394 head injuries from, III:1519 splenic trauma from, IV:3141, 3142 Gunther’s disease. See Congenital erythropoietic porphyria Gustatory sweating, IV:2505 Guthrie test, IV:2575 Gutta percha, IV:2915 Guttate psoriasis, IV:2756 Gyne-Lotrimin. See Topical antifungal drugs Gynecological surgery Haolperidol with buspirone, IV:3111 with cholesterol tests, II:793 for delusions, II:1023 for dementia, II:1026 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for hallucinations, III:1504 neuroleptic malignant syndrome from, II:676 for paranoia, IV:2493 for paranoid disorder, IV:2566 pharmacogenetics and, IV:2574 for psychoses, IV:2766 for psychosis, I:300 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 tardive dyskinesia from, V:3242 for Tourette syndrome, V:3344 Halothane for general anesthesia, I:186 with muscular dystrophy, III:2266 Halprin, Anna, III:2225 Halsted mastectomy. See Radical mastectomy HAM-D. See Hamilton Depression Scale Ham test, II:874 Hamamelis virginiana. See Witch hazel Hamamelis water. See Witch hazel Hamilton, Alice, IV:2387 Hamilton Anxiety Scale, I:320, 323 Hamilton Depression Scale, I:481, II:1034 Hammertoe, III:1505–1506 Hand burns of, I:617 in cervical spondylosis, II:720 congenital amputation of, II:887 corns and calluses of, II:923 edema of from acute kidney failure, I:44 from nephritis, IV:2333 gout in, III:1479 muscle spasms and cramps of, III:2261 trachoma from, V:3355 Hand, foot and mouth disease, II:1212, III:1506–1508, 1507 Hand-eye coordination. See Psychomotor performance Hand injuries, I:498, 500 See also Fingertip injuries Hand-Schuller-Christian disease, III:1638–1639 Hand surgery for fingertip injuries, II:1333 local anesthesia for, I:190 reconstruction, IV:2410 Hand warts, V:3548 Handwashing cross infection and, III:1674, 1676 for enteroviruses prevention, II:1213 3766 for hand-foot-mouth disease prevention, III:1507 for infection control, III:1822 for laryngitis prevention, III:1957, 1958 for listeriosis, III:2014 with patient isolation, III:1873 for rhinitis prevention, IV:2904 for rotaviruses prevention, IV:2922 for roundworm infections prevention, IV:2925 for RSV prevention, IV:2869 for salmonella poisoning prevention, IV:2937 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for streptococcal infections prevention, IV:3180, 3184 for strongyloidiasis prevention, V:3292–3293 throat cultures and, V:3294 for trachoma prevention, V:3356 Hanna, Thomas, III:2222 Hansen, G. A., III:1977 Hansen’s disease. See Leprosy Hantaan virus. See Hantaviruses Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, III:1509 Hantaviruses, III:1508–1510 hemorrhagic fevers from, III:1592 infection control and, III:1822 HAPE. See High altitude pulmonary edema Haplotype, HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 Haptic hallucinations. See Hallucinations Haptoglobin test, III:1510–1511 Hard contact lenses. See Contact lenses Hard corn. See Corns Hard measles. See Measles Hard palate, with mucormycosis, III:2232 Hardening of the arteries. See Arteriosclerosis Harelip. See Cleft lip Hare’s ear for indigestion, III:1814 for measles, III:2140 Harpagophytum procumbens. See Devil’s claw Harper, Susan, III:2227 Harri-Drummond instrumentation. See Spinal instrumentation Harrington rod. See Spinal instrumentation Harrison Act of 1914, II:831 Hartnup disease, III:1511–1512, IV:2515 Hartshorn. See Buckthorn Hashimoto’s disease. See Autoimmune thyroiditis Hashish. See Marijuana Hatha yoga, III:1512–1515, V:3595 See also Yoga Hauptmann-Thannhauser muscular dystrophy. See Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy HAV. See Hepatitis A Hawaiian massage. See Massage Hawthorn for arrhythmias, I:354 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for ischemia, III:1871 for menopause, III:2162 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for palpitations, IV:2466 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 Hay fever, I:111 with atopic dermatitis, I:403 nasal polyps from, IV:2315, 2316 nosebleed from, IV:2364 with penicillins, IV:2528 tests for, I:123 See also Allergic rhinitis Hayashi, Chujiru, IV:2848 Haze, after laser eye surgery, IV:2588 Hazel nut. See Witch hazel HBO therapy. See Hyperbaric oxygenation HBsAG. See Hepatitis B surface antigen HBV. See Hepatitis B virus HCAs. See Heterocyclic antidepressants hCG. See Human chorionic gonadotropin HCL. See Hairy cell leukemia HCP. See Hereditary coproporphyria Hct. See Hematocrit HCV. See Hepatitis C HCV IgG antibody test, III:1604 HD. See Huntington disease HDL cholesterol, II:786–788, III:1699 HDL cholesterol lipoproteins, I:394, II:789 in heart attacks, III:1533, 1535 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706, 1707 lipoproteins test for, III:2007–2008 tests for, II:792 HDN. See Erythroblastosis fetalis HDV. See Hepatitis delta virus Head abnormalities of from Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 mental retardation from, III:2175 cancer of (See Head and neck cancers) physical examination of, IV:2593 small (See Microcephaly) Head, Henry, IV:2842 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 caffeine for, II:625 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 from child abuse, II:754 from chronic kidney failure, II:807 cluster (See Cluster headache) from contact lenses, IV:2714 from decongestants, II:1011–1012 from dizziness, II:1095 from electric brain stimulation, II:1146 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1144 from endarterectomy, II:1181 from epoetin, II:645 with galactorrhea, III:1375 from Hartnup disease, III:1511 from heavy metal poisoning, III:1560 from histamine, III:2132 from hormone contraceptives, II:912 from hyperopia, III:1712 from infertility drugs, III:1831 from kidney failure, I:44, II:807 from kyphosis, III:1932 from lead poisoning, III:1966 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 from melioidosis, III:2150 migraine (See Migraine) from minoxidil, III:2203 from mitral valve prolapse, III:2207 from mucormycosis, III:2232 from multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 from mycobacterial infections, III:2277 from myelography, III:2284–2285 from nasal polyps, IV:2316 nausea with, IV:2325 from nitrite poisoning, III:2194 from ophthalmic ultrasonography, II:1259 osteopathy for, IV:2422 from overhydration, IV:2449 pain from, IV:2459 from phototherapy, IV:2591, 2979 from pituitary tumors, IV:2607 from PMS, IV:2710 from poisoning, IV:2643 from postconcussion syndrome, III:1521 in pregnancy, IV:2697 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 from regional anesthesia, I:192 from sildenafil citrate, IV:3054 from smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 from somatoform disorders, IV:3114 from tapeworm disease, V:3240 with TMJ, V:3249 from toxoplasmosis, V:3349 from vasodilators, V:3483 vision training for, V:3508 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Headsman. See Plantain Healing crisis from detoxification, II:1044 from fasting, II:1294 from homeopathy, III:1660–1661, 1665–1666 Healing imagery, III:1490, 1491 See also Guided imagery Health care costs of acupressure, I:38 of colonic irrigation, II:855–856 of detoxification therapy, II:1043–1044 of homeopathy, III:1666 of massage, III:2126 of reiki, IV:2850 Health insurance for homeopathy, III:1666 of massage, III:2126 Health personnel cross infection and, III:1674, 1675 with hepatitis C, III:1603 with hepatitis D, III:1605 in infection control, III:1822–1823 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 Hearing aids, I:415, III:1525–1528, 1526f cerumen impaction and, II:710 vs. cochlear implants, II:838 with Down syndrome, II:1100 for hearing loss, III:1529 after mastoidectomy, III:2133 for otosclerosis, IV:2436 for ototoxicity, IV:2438 for senior’s health, IV:2999–3000, 3001 after stapedectomy, IV:3156 for tinnitus, V:3323 Hearing disorders with anticancer agents, I:248 from antitubercular agents, I:490 audiometry for, I:414–415 cochlear implants for, II:837–839 from cytomegalovirus, V:3339 with diuretics, II:1089 hearing loss (See Hearing loss) from otitis media, IV:2434 from peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 Hearing loss, III:1528–1530 from achondroplasia, I:22 from acoustic neuroma, I:28–30 age-related, IV:2997, 2999–3000 with aging, I:69 from Alport’s syndrome, I:131, 132 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 audiometry for, I:414–415 balance and coordination tests and, I:438 from cerumen impaction, II:709 conductive, II:1123 from dizziness, II:1095 with Down syndrome, II:1099 3767 Hearing loss Head and neck cancers, III:1515–1519, 1517 brachytherapy for, IV:2815 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 radial neck dissection for, IV:2813–2815 vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 See also Brain tumors Head injuries, III:1519–1523 with antiangina agents, I:230 with anticancer agents, I:248 aphasia from, I:333, 334, 335 blood gas analysis for, I:528 brain abscess from, I:566 catatonia from, II:676, 1006 with chest physical therapy, II:745 from child abuse, II:754 concussion from, II:878 conduct disorder from, II:883 delirium from, II:1021 diabetes insipidus from, II:1046 vs. dissociative disorders, II:1087 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 dizziness from, II:1094 enteral nutrition after, V:3400 galactorrhea from, III:1375 hypothermia from, III:1754 impulse control disorders and, III:1807 with methadone, III:2182 in motion sickness, III:2219 near drowning from, IV:2327 night terrors from, II:676 with opioid analgesics, I:177 papilledema from, IV:2488 post-concussion syndrome, IV:2678 retinal vein occlusion from, IV:2879 seizures from, IV:2986 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 smelling disorders from, I:215, IV:3098, 3099, 3100 sports-related, IV:3146 subdural hematoma from, IV:3204 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 tremors from, V:3381 visual impairment from, V:3510 wilderness medicine for, V:3562 Head lice. See Pediculosis humanus capitis Head shadow, with hearing aids, III:1526 Headache, III:1523–1525 acetaminophen for, I:18 from acoustic neuroma, I:29 from acute kidney failure, I:44 from allergic rhinitis, I:112 from antiangina agents, I:230 aromatherapy for, I:349 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 aspirin for, I:378 from astigmatism, I:385 Hearing loss with erythromycins, II:1232 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 hearing aids for, III:1525–1528 from labyrinthitis, III:1935–1936 from lead poisoning, III:1966 vs. learning disorders, III:1969 from mastoidectomy, III:2133, 2134 from measles, III:2139 from Meniere’s disease, III:2151–2152 from middle ear ventilation, III:2305 from neonatal jaundice, IV:2330 from otitis media with effusion, III:2304 from otosclerosis, IV:2436 otoscopy for, II:1121 from Paget’s disease, IV:2455 from perforated eardrum, IV:2534 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 from rubella, V:3339 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 from schwannomas, I:570 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 from stapedectomy, IV:3156 stapedectomy for, IV:3154 surgery for, II:1122 testing for, I:417 with tinnitus, V:3322 tuning fork tests for, III:1531 from X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, IV:2560 Hearing tests in aviation medicine, I:427 for central auditory processing, I:417 for dyslexia, II:1116 for hearing aids, III:1527 for mastoidectomy, III:2133 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for muscular dystrophy, III:2265 for otosclerosis, IV:2436 for perforated eardrum, IV:2534 in senior’s health, IV:2999 with speech disorders, IV:3123 for stapedectomy, IV:3155 with stuttering, IV:3199 with tuning forks, III:1531–1532 Heart abnormalities of (See Congenital heart defects) aspartate aminotransferase in, I:374 catecholamines in, II:677 catheterization of (See Heart catheterization) damage to (See Heart damage) electrophysiology study of, II:1163–1166 enlarged (See Heart hypertrophy) enlargement of (See Heart hypertrophy) function of (See Heart function) 3768 lactate dehydrogenase in, III:1939, 1941 physical examination of, IV:2594 situs inversus of, IV:3060 sudden cardiac death and, IV:3212 ultrasonography of, V:3269 x-rays of, V:3269 Heart abnormalities. See Congenital heart defects Heart arrhythmia. See Arrhythmia Heart atrium enlarged, atrial ectopic beats from, I:406 in mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206 in mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 tricuspid valve and, V:3388–3389 Heart attack, III:1532–1536 with ACE inhibitors, I:204 aldolase and, I:100 from aneurysmectomy, I:193 angina pectoris and, I:194, 195 from angiography, I:200 from angioplasty, I:202 with antiangina agents, I:230 antimyocardial antibody test for, I:291–292 from aortic dissection, I:327 with arrhythmias, I:352 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:373 aspirin for prevention of, I:378 from atherosclerosis, I:393–394 from balloon valvuloplasty, I:443 beta blockers for, I:474 from blood clots, V:3298 bundle branch block from, I:614 caffeine and, II:626 with calcium channel blockers, I:529 cardiac catheterization and, II:656, 657 cardiac rehabilitation and, II:659, 660 from cocaine, II:832 coronary artery bypass grafting and, II:925, 928 from coronary heart disease, II:929 vs. costochondritis, II:940 creatine kinase test for, II:948 from decompression sickness, II:1009 deep vein thrombosis and, II:1013, V:3491 vs. diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1070 with diuretics, II:1089 from drug overdose, II:1104 echocardiography for, II:1129 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 embolism and, I:355 embolism from, II:1169 from exercise test, IV:3192 from Fabry’s disease, III:2005 fibrin split products and, II:1319–1320 from heart surgery, III:1544 heart valve diseases from, V:3474 hemoglobin test for, III:1577 from high cholesterol, II:786, 788, 792 from hyperaldosteronism, III:1696 from hypercholesterolemia, III:1699–1700 from hyperkalemia, III:1705, 2194 hypertension and, III:1720 hypotension from, III:1752 implantable cardioverter-defibrillator and, III:1600, 1803 from ischemia, III:1868 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1939, 1940, 1941–1942 lactic acid test for, III:1944, 1945 laxatives after, III:1963 life support with, III:1999 liver function tests for, III:2026–2027 magnesium and, III:2078 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 from marijuana, III:2121 in men, III:2166 mitral valve insufficiency from, III:2206 MUGA scan for, III:2233–2234 myocardial resection after, III:2288 myoglobin test for, III:2291–2292 near drowning from, IV:2327 from obesity, IV:2373, 2378 with oral contraceptives, IV:2401 vs. pericarditis, IV:2539 pericarditis after, IV:2538 pericarditis from, IV:2536 with plastic surgery, IV:2621 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747 pulmonary artery catheterization after, IV:2776 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 vs. pulmonary embolism, IV:2780 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 with respiratory function tests, IV:2784 sildenafil citrate and, IV:3052, 3054 from smoking, IV:3104 from stress, III:1425 vs. sudden cardiac death, IV:3212 technetium heart scan after, V:3245 from temporal arteritis, V:3247–3248 thallium heart scan after, V:3277 from thoracic surgery, V:3289 from thrombocytosis, V:3297 thrombolytic therapy for, V:3298 troponins test for, V:3395 vasodilators and, V:3483 ventricular aneurysm from, V:3496–3497 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from generalized pustular psoriasis, IV:2756 from malnutrition, III:2104 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 Valsalva maneuver for, V:3471 from vitamin toxicity, V:3522 Heart defects. See Congenital heart defects Heart diseases with ACE inhibitors, I:204 acidosis from, III:2179 aging and, I:69 from alcoholism, I:96 ambulatory electrocardiography for, III:1653–1655 from amyloidosis, I:161 angiography for, I:197 from animal bite infections, I:206 from anoxia, I:216 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 with antihistamines, I:278 with antimalarials, I:287 antimyocardial antibody test for, I:291–292 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 arrhythmia, I:352–353, 407 Atkins diet and, I:402 atrial fibrillation from, I:407 aviation medicine and, I:427 with beta blockers, I:476 biopsy for, III:2287 blood transfusions and, V:3367 bowel function and, I:565 bowel preparation and, I:563 bronchodilators with, I:602 bundle branch block from, I:614 caffeine with, II:626 calcium channel blockers and, II:628 cancer (See Heart cancer) cardiac catheterization for, II:655 cardiac rehabilitation for, II:659 CAT scan for, II:875 catecholamines levels with, II:678 with chemotherapy, II:740, III:1647 chest x-ray for, II:747 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790 vs. CO poisoning, II:652 with colony stimulating factors, II:643 congenital (See Congenital heart defects) with congestive cardiomyopathy, II:896 COPD and, II:810 coronary stenting for, II:934–935 with decongestants, II:1011 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 diabetes mellitus and, II:1048, 1049, 1052 with dicyclomine, I:309 digitalis for, II:1073 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with diuretics, II:1089 dizziness from, II:1095 with dronabinol, II:644 dyspnea from, IV:3036 echocardiography for, II:1129 electrocardiography for, II:1148 embolism from, II:1169 with endarterectomy, II:1180 with epoetin, II:643 with erythromycins, II:1232 exercise test for, IV:3191 from Fabry’s disease, III:2003 with face lift, II:1275 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 with gammaglobulin, III:1391 vs. generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 glaucoma and, III:1458 gout and, III:1477 heart transplantation for, III:1545 with hemodialysis, II:1059 with hemofiltration, I:45 from high cholesterol, III:1708 from hookworm disease, III:1668 HRT for, III:1669–1670 from hypercholesterolemia, III:1699–1700 hypertension and, III:1720–1723 with hypotonic duodenography, III:1759 with hysterectomy, III:1762 ileus from, III:1779 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1793 ipecac and, III:1858, 1859 with joint replacement, III:1891 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 with kidney transplantation, III:1919 LDL cholesterol and, II:786–787, 788 from leptospirosis, III:1982 lifestyle and, III:2200 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2013 with liver transplantation, III:2029 with lung transplantation, III:2054 with lymphography, III:2066 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 from Marfan syndrome, III:2114–2115 in men, III:2164, 2166 menopause and, III:2159, 2160 with methadone, III:2182 vs. myocarditis, III:2290 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 from obesity, IV:2378 from oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 with opioid analgesics, I:177 with oral contraceptives, IV:2401 with oxytocin, II:1109 PET scan for, IV:2677 from phytoestrogens, IV:2710 with prochlorperazine, I:293 pseudoxanthoma elasticum and, IV:2753, 2754 3769 Heart diseases ventricular assist devices for, V:3497 with ventricular ectopic beats, V:3498 ventricular fibrillation after, V:3499 ventricular tachycardia from, V:3503 from Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 Heart biopsy, III:2286–2287, 2287 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 after heart transplantation, III:1547–1548 Heart block, III:1536–1537 electrocardiography for, II:1148 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 Heart cancer, III:2306 bundle branch block from, I:614 mediastinoscopy for, III:2143 Heart catheterization, II:655–659, 657f for aneurysmectomy, I:193 for aortic valve stenosis, I:330 for arrhythmias, I:353 for atrial septal defects, I:409–410 in balloon valvuloplasty, I:442 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 for coronary heart disease, II:931 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1163–1164, 1165 for heart abnormalities, III:1543 with heart biopsy, III:2287 for heart failure, III:1538 for heart surgery, III:1544 for heart valve diseases, V:3474 for heart valve replacement, III:1551 hemoptysis from, III:1589 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 for myocarditis, III:2289–2290 for pericarditis, IV:2539 for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785 for restrictive cardiomyopathy, IV:2873 for transposition of the great arteries, V:3374 for ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 with ventricular assist devices, V:3497 for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 Heart conduction defects, III:2263 Heart damage antimyocardial antibody test for, I:291–292 from aortic valve insufficiency, I:328 from balloon valvuloplasty, I:443 from Chagas’ disease, II:727 from CPR, II:664–665 from defibrillation, II:1016 from dengue fever, II:1028 from echinococcosis, II:1127 Heart diseases pulmonary artery catheterization for, IV:2776–2778 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 rehabilitation for, IV:2846 with respiratory function tests, IV:2784 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 retinal artery occlusion and, IV:2875, 2876 rheumatic (See Rheumatic heart disease) from rubella, V:3339 with salpingo-oophorectomy, IV:2939 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 sedation with, IV:2983, 2984 senior’s health and, IV:2996, 3000 sick sinus syndrome from, IV:3040 sildenafil citrate with, IV:3051, 3054 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 from STDs, IV:3020 substance abuse and, IV:3209 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 with thyroid hormones, V:3313 with TIA, V:3372 transesophageal echocardiography for, V:3365 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 triglycerides tests for, V:3393 troponins test for, V:3396 from typhoid, V:3422 with vasodilators, V:3483 vegetarianism and, V:3487 with ventricular ectopic beats, V:3498 See also Cardiovascular diseases Heart failure, III:1537–1541 acidosis from, III:2179 acute kidney failure from, I:44 amputation and, I:157–158 aneurysmectomy and, I:193 from anorexia nervosa, I:212 vs. ARDS, I:67 from asbestosis, I:370 ascites from, I:372 from atrial septal defects, I:409 from beriberi, I:469, IV:3161 from berylliosis, I:472 from black lung disease, I:505 from bronchiectasis, I:596 from bulimia, I:612 with calcium channel blockers, II:629 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 from Chagas’ disease, II:727 congestive (See Congestive heart failure) from cor pulmonale, II:916 cyanosis from, II:980 from DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 3770 from drug overdose, II:1104, 1106 ECMO for, II:1256 edema from, II:1134, IV:2490 from emphysema, II:1173 from endocarditis, II:1183 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 exercise and, II:1251 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 heart block and, III:1537 heart transplantation for, III:1545 hemoglobin test for, III:1577 from hemolytic anemia, III:1579 from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 kidney failure from, I:44 liver function tests for, III:2026–2027 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 from metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 from mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 from myocarditis, III:2289–2290 from pancarditis, IV:2898 from placental abruption, IV:2613 pleurisy from, IV:2631 protein components test and, IV:2746 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 from sick sinus syndrome, IV:3040 in sudden cardiac death, IV:3212 from thiamine deficiency, V:3524 from thyroid crisis, III:1725 vasodilators for, V:3482 from ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 with ventricular ectopic beats, V:3498 from ventricular fibrillation, V:3499 from ventricular septal defect, V:3501 from ventricular tachycardia, V:3504 from Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3544 See also Heart attack Heart function in Addison’s disease, I:53 calcium channel blockers for, II:627–629 cardiac catheterization for, II:655 with digitalis, II:1073 in edema, IV:2490 after heart transplantation, III:1547, 1548 hemoglobin and, III:1577 myocardial resection for, III:2288 with nasal packing, IV:2314 Heart hypertrophy from aortic coarctation, II:830 from aortic valve insufficiency, I:328 from athletic heart syndrome, I:400 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 exercise test and, IV:3192 from heart failure, III:1537 hypertension and, III:1720 from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 Heart lining. See Endocardium Heart-lung machine for bypass surgery, I:396 in coronary artery bypass grafting, II:926 for heart surgery, III:1534 in heart surgery, III:1543 for heart transplantation, III:1547 for heart valve repair, III:1549 for heart valve replacement, III:1551 for hypothermia, III:1755 for lung transplantation, III:2055 ventricular assist devices after, V:3497 Heart-lung transplantation, III:2054–2056, IV:3056 Heart monitoring by electrocardiography, II:1147–1148 with prematurity, IV:2707 by transesophageal echocardiography, V:3365 Heart murmurs, III:1541–1542 from aortic coarctation, II:830 from aortic dissection, I:327 with aortic valve stenosis, I:330 from aplastic anemia, I:337 with congenital heart diseases, II:900 from endocarditis, II:1184 in heart failure, III:1539 from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 with low back pain, III:2032 in mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206 in mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 in pulmonary valve insufficiency, IV:2787 from tricuspid valve insufficiency, V:3389 from ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 Heart muscle. See Myocardium Heart rate antiarrhythmics for, I:233 in athletic heart syndrome, I:400 in autonomic dysreflexia, IV:3130 in bundle branch block, I:614 with calcium channel blockers, II:627, 628 carotid sinus massage for, II:667 with cholinergic agents, II:794–795 from dehydration, II:1017 with diabetes insipidus, II:1047 in drug overdose, II:1105 fetal (See Fetal heart rate) with fluoroquinolones, II:1345, 1346 in gangrene, III:1394 in heart attacks, III:1534 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for myocarditis, III:2290 rejection of, V:3497 for restrictive cardiomyopathy, IV:2873 Heart tumors benign, III:2306 vs. mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 Heart valve abnormalities. See Congenital heart defects Heart valve diseases, V:3472–3475, 3473f antibiotic prophylaxis for, IV:2726 balloon valvuloplasty for, I:442 from campylobacteriosis, II:631 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 Doppler ultrasonography for, II:1097 from gonorrhea, III:1472 heart failure from, III:1538 from myxoma, III:2306 from rheumatic fever, IV:3223 ventricular tachycardia from, V:3503–3504 See also Mitral valve prolapse Heart valve prosthesis bowel preparation and, I:562–563 jaundice from, III:1882 staphylococcal infections from, IV:3157 Heart valve replacement, III:1550–1552 anemia from, III:1576 antibiotic prophylaxis for, IV:2726 for aortic valve insufficiency, I:328 for aortic valve stenosis, I:330 with colonoscopy, II:858 endocarditis and, II:1184 for heart valve diseases, V:3474 vs. heart valve repair, III:1549 hematocrit test for, III:1572 hemolytic anemia from, III:1579 jaundice from, III:1882 for rheumatic fever, IV:3223 sepsis from, IV:3004 tooth extraction and, V:3332 for tricuspid valve stenosis, V:3390 Heart valve stenosis, II:1129 Heart valves balloon valvuloplasty for, I:442 damage to from balloon valvuloplasty, I:443 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854, 2855 from rheumatic fever, IV:3223 echocardiography for, II:1129 in endocarditis, II:1182, 1183 in heart murmurs, III:1541 pseudomonas infections of, IV:2751 repair of, III:1549–1550 Heart ventricles in athletic heart syndrome, I:400 in atrial septal defects, I:410 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 in cardiac tamponade, II:661 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in congenital heart disease, II:899–900 in congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 in coronary artery bypass grafting, II:925 detected by MUGA scan, III:2233 in heart failure, III:1537 in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 in mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206 myxoma in, III:2306 Heartburn, III:1553–1556 from achalasia, I:20 antacids for, I:217 from aspirin, I:378 from dyspepsia, II:1118 from hiatal hernias, III:1624 hiccups from, III:1632 histamine H2 antagonists for, I:314 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 lower esophageal ring with, III:2034 from pregnancy, IV:2696 tests for, II:1242 See also Gastroesophageal reflux Heat dehydration from, II:1017 edema from, II:1134 physical allergy from, IV:2591–2592 with rosacea, IV:2918 Heat/cold application for abscesses, I:14 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for fractures, II:1365 for osteoarthritis, IV:2999 with rehabilitation, IV:2847 for sciatica, IV:2965 for tennis elbow, V:3253 for tension headache, V:3255 for whiplash, V:3556 See also Cryotherapy; Heat treatment Heat cramps. See Heat stress disorders Heat damage. See Heat stress disorders Heat exhaustion, III:1556–1558 from dicyclomine, I:308 from prickly heat, IV:2716 wilderness medicine for, V:3563 Heat exposure. See Heat stress disorders Heat prostration. See Heat exhaustion Heat rash. See Prickly heat Heat stress disorders, III:1556–1558 cooling treatments for, II:914–915 with prochlorperazine, I:293 with smoke inhalation, IV:3102 Heat stroke. See Heatstroke Heat treatment, III:1558–1560 for cervical disk disease, II:718 for contractures, II:913 3771 Heat treatment in heat stress disorders, III:1557 from hemolytic anemia, III:1579 from hyperthyroidism, III:1724 from hypothermia, III:1754 with implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, III:1803 in metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 from motion sickness, III:2218 music therapy for, III:2269 regulation of, III:1756 with RMSF, IV:2910 in septic shock, IV:3005 Heart rhythm, irregular. See Arrhythmia Heart septum, V:3374 Heart sounds in mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206 in mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 Heart surgery angiography for, I:197 antimyocardial antibody test for, I:291–292 for arrhythmias, I:353–354 atrial fibrillation from, I:407 for atrial septal defects, I:410 cardiac tamponade from, II:661 chest drainage therapy for, II:743 for congenital abnormalities, III:1542–1545 for coronary heart disase, II:934 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for Down syndrome, II:1100 endocarditis from, II:1183 for heart failure, III:1540 for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 myocardial resection, III:2288 myocarditis from, III:2289 pericardial effusion from, IV:2536 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 pulmonary artery catheterization after, IV:2777 technetium heart scan with, V:3246 tooth extraction and, V:3332 for transposition of the great arteries, V:3374 for ventricular septal defect, V:3501 for ventricular tachycardia, V:3504 for Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3575 Heart transplantation, III:1545–1549, 1546t biopsy for, III:2287 cardiac rehabilitation for, II:659 for Chagas’ disease, II:728 dysthymic disorder after, II:1034 for heart failure, III:1538, 1540 for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795, 1796 with lymphomas, III:2092 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 Heat treatment for costochondritis, II:940 for dysmenorrhea, II:1118 for fibroadenoma, II:1322 foot care and, II:1357 for frostbite, II:1371 immobilization and, III:1782 for infectious arthritis, III:1821 for leech removal, III:1971 for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for low back pain, III:2032 for lymphadenitis, III:2065 for mastitis, III:2132 for near drowning, IV:2327 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414, 2999 for pain management, IV:2463 for postpolio syndrome, IV:2684 with rehabilitation, IV:2847 for sciatica, IV:2965 for tennis elbow, V:3252 for torticollis, V:3341 Heatstroke, III:1556–1558 from antiarrhythmics, I:234 from prickly heat, IV:2716 wilderness medicine for, V:3563 Heavy chain disease, III:1790 Heavy metal poisoning, III:1560–1561 chelation therapy for, II:737 delirium from, II:1021, 1022 detoxification for, II:1041–1042 Fanconi’s syndrome from, II:1290, 1291 from food, II:1353 kidney damage from, IV:2337 multiple chemical sensitivity from, III:2235 multiple myeloma and, III:2239 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2550, 2553 renal tubular acidosis from, IV:2858 renovascular hypertension and, IV:2860 seizures from, IV:2986 Heavy periods. See Menorrhagia Hebephrenic schizophrenia. See Disorganized schizophrenia Heberden’s nodes, IV:2412 Heel, bursitis of, I:620 Heel bone. See Calcaneous Heel spurs, III:1562–1564 See also Plantar fasciitis Heel surgery, III:1563 Heimlich, Henry, III:1564 Heimlich maneuver, II:773, III:1564–1566, 1565f Helical CT. See Computed tomography scan Helicobacter pylori, V:3432–3434 digestive ulcers from, V:3431–3435 dyspepsia from, II:1118 gastritis from, III:1405–1408 helicobacteriosis from, III:1566–1568 3772 indigestion from, III:1813, 1814 macrolides for, I:241 MALT lymphomas from, III:2108 stomach cancer from, IV:3164–3165 ulcers from, I:313 Helicobacteriosis, III:1566–1568, 1567 Helium, for inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 Helium-oxygen, for inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 Heller, Joseph, III:1569, III:1569, III:1570 Heller’s disease. See Childhood disintegrative disorder Hellerwork, II:1327, III:1568–1571, 1569 Helmet flower. See Skullcap Helminths, II:1216 Hemacytometer counting, IV:2624 Hemagglutination inhibition antibody, IV:2928–2929 Hemangioma, I:493–494 acquired (See Cherry hemangiomas; Spider angiomas) capillary (See Capillary hemangioma) cavernous (See Cavernous hemangioma) congenital (See Congenital hemangioma) Hemarthrosis, I:366 Hematin, IV:2674 Hematinics, for myelofibrosis, III:2282 Hematocrit, III:1571–1572 with AIDS, I:84, 86 with anemia, IV:2838 for cor pulmonale, II:917 with dialysis, II:1061 for mineral deficiencies, III:2196 normal ranges for, I:521 in secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 Hematologic diseases acid phosphatase test for, I:23 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 from antihistamines, I:278 antimalarials and, I:287 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 from aspirin, I:378 from benzodiazepines, I:467 bleeding time test for, I:514 blood transfusions and, V:3367 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 with cephalosporins, II:694 vs. cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 with chest drainage therapy, II:744 with electromyography, II:1160 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 fibrinogen test for, II:1320 with fifth disease, II:1329 with gout drugs, III:1480 hemoptysis from, III:1589 with hepatitis G, III:1609 from leptospirosis, III:1982 with mifepristone, III:2186 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with plastic surgery, IV:2621 platelet aggregation test for, IV:2623 platelet count for, IV:2624–2625 from procainamide, I:234 from rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2899 from rubella, V:3339 with sepsis, IV:3004 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 with small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 from sulfonamides, IV:3217 T & A and, V:3325 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 urinalysis for, V:3445 with vasodilators, V:3483 with ventricular assist devices, V:3497 See also Hemorrhage Hematomas from angiography, I:200 from aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 from balloon valvuloplasty, I:443 from breast biopsy, I:577 from breast reconstruction, I:589 CAT scan for, II:875 after drug therapy monitoring, II:1108 epidural (See Epidural hematoma) from face lift, II:1275, 1276 fingertip, II:1332 from parathyroidectomy, IV:2497 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 splenic (See Splenic trauma) from thyroidectomy, V:3317 from venous access, V:3494 Hematopoietic stem cells in aplastic anemia, I:336 in myelofibrosis, III:2282 Hematuria Alport’s syndrome and, I:131 from APSGN, I:48 cystoscopy for, II:996 from kidney cancer, III:1909 of the kidneys, III:1775–1776 Hematuric kidney diseases, III:1775–1776 Heme in hemoglobin, III:1576 porphyrias and, IV:2670–2673 Hemi-laminectomy. See Laminectomy Hemiparesis, III:2145 Hemiplegia, IV:2491, 2720 Hemispherectomy, IV:2988 Hemoccult test, II:1303 Hemochromatosis, III:1572–1574 cirrhosis from, II:815, 816 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 iron tests for, III:1863, 1864 iron toxicity from, III:2194 liver biopsy for, III:2017 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 test for, III:1576 Hemoglobin A1, III:1575, 1576 Hemoglobin A1c. See Glycosylated hemoglobin test Hemoglobin A2, III:1575, 1576 Hemoglobin C, III:1575, 1576 Hemoglobin C disease, III:1576 Hemoglobin E disease, V:3271–3272 Hemoglobin electrophoresis, III:1574–1576, IV:3044 Hemoglobin F. See Fetal hemoglobin Hemoglobin H disease, III:1578, V:3270–3272, 3274–3276 Hemoglobin S, III:1575, 1576 Hemoglobin S disease. See Sickle cell anemia Hemoglobin test, III:1576–1577, IV:2838 See also Red blood cell indices Hemoglobinopathies, II:1312, 1313, III:1577–1579 Hemoglogin electrophoresis, III:1578 Hemolysis from alcoholic hepatitis, III:1598 anemia and, II:915 from G6PD, III:1463 with glycosylated hemoglobin test, III:1469 with hemolytic anemia, III:1579 jaundice from, III:1881–1882 normocytic anemia from, IV:2839 from physical allergy, IV:2592 uric acid tests for, V:3442 from vitamin K toxicity, V:3523 Hemolytic anemia, I:181–182, 183, 185, III:1579–1580 antimalarials and, I:287 autoimmune, I:422, 423, II:915 from bartonellosis, I:451 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 congenital nonspherocytic, V:3420 from E. coli, II:1235 fetal hemoglobin test and, II:1313 from G6PD, III:1463–1465 haptoglobin test for, III:1510–1511 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 reticulocyte count for, IV:2874 splenectomy for, III:1883 Hemolytic disease of newborn. See Erythroblastosis fetalis Hemolytic diseases jaundice from, III:1881–1882, 1881–1884 splenectomy for, IV:3139 Hemolytic streptococcal gangrene. See Flesh-eating disease alpha-Hemolytic streptococci, IV:2321 Hemolytic uremic syndrome, III:1580–1582 from E. coli, II:1205, 1235, 1236, 1237 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from food poisoning, II:1354, 1356 Hemophilia, II:826–827, 828, 829, III:1582–1585, 1583f with antidiarrhea drugs, I:265 blood transfusions for, V:3366, 3368 carrier testing for, III:1435–1436 in children, II:762 circumcision with, II:813 genetic counseling for, III:1430 with hepatitis C, III:1603 with hepatitis D, III:1605 with hepatitis G, III:1609 vs. hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 iron deficiency anemia from, III:1860 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 platelet aggregation test for, IV:2623, 2624 with protease inhibitors, I:304 PT test for, IV:2749 from sex-linked inheritance, I:491 vs. vitamin K deficiency, V:3519 from von Willebrand disease, V:3531 Hemophilia A. See Hemophilia Hemophilia B. See Christmas disease Hemophilia C. See Hemophilia Hemophilus conjunctivitis from, II:902 vaccines for, III:1587 Hemophilus infections, III:1586–1588 Hemoptysis, III:1588–1590 from ABPA, I:107 from aspergillosis, I:375 Hemoquant test, II:1303 Hemorrhage acute kidney failure from, I:44 after adrenalectomy, I:63, 64 with albinism, I:90 anemia and, I:182 anemia from, III:1576 from aneurysmectomy, I:193 angiography and, I:197, 199 from angioplasty, I:202 anticoagulants and, I:250 from antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 from aortic dissection, I:327 from appendectomy, I:340 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 aspirin induced, III:1860 from atelectasis, I:390 from balloon valvuloplasty, I:443 from bone marrow aspiration, I:549 with bowel resection, I:564 in brain (See Brain hemorrhage) cerebral (See Cerebral hemorrhage) cerebrospinal fluid analysis for, II:706 from cervical conization, II:717 from cesarean section, II:727 from chest drainage therapy, II:744 3773 Hemorrhage liver cancer from, III:2019, 2022 phlebotomy for, IV:2580 restrictive cardiomyopathy from, IV:2873 with vibriosis, V:3506 Hemoconcentration, IV:2982 Hemocytometer, I:521 Hemodialysis, II:1058–1062, 1059 for acute kidney failure, I:45–46 for allergic purpura, I:110 Alport’s syndrome and, I:131, 132 for amyloidosis, I:162 arteriovenous fistula from, I:356 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for drug overdose, II:1106 electrolyte disorders and, II:1155, 1156 for hantaviruses, III:1509 for hemolytic uremic syndrome, II:1237 hepatitis B vaccines for, III:1602 hepatitis C from, III:1603 hepatitis G from, III:1609 for hypercalcemia, III:1697 hypertension and, III:1721 for kidney failure, I:45, II:807, V:3591 after kidney transplantation, III:1922 Korsakoff’s syndrome from, III:1930 for leptospirosis, III:1982 for nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337, 2338 neutropenia from, IV:2354 osteomyelitis from, IV:2419 vs. peritoneal dialysis, II:1059 platelet aggregation test for, IV:2624 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3298 Hemoglobin 2,3-DPG in, V:3420 in AIDS, I:84 in anemia, II:915 in anoxia, I:216 in CO poisoning, II:651 in coagulation diorders, II:828 in cyanosis, II:980 disorders of, III:1577–1578 in emphysema, II:1173 fetal (See Fetal hemoglobin) folic acid deficiency anemia and, II:1349 in hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 haptoglobin test for, III:1511 in hemolytic anemia, III:1579 in jaundice, III:1880–1881, 1882 liver function tests for, III:2026 methemoglobinemia and, III:2183–2184 in neonatal jaundice, IV:2330 in nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 in nitrite poisoning, III:2194 normal ranges for, I:521, III:1577 red blood cell indices for, IV:2837–2839 in reticulocytes, IV:2874 Hemorrhage with chest physical therapy, II:745 in childbirth, II:758 from cholecystectomy, II:778 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790 from choriocarcinomas, II:797 choroidal (See Choroidal hemorrhage) circulation and, III:1999 coagulation disorders and, II:826, 827, 828, 829, 1319 from colonoscopy, II:858 from colostomy, II:863 from concussion, II:879 with coronary stents, II:935 from cystoscopy, II:997 from dengue fever, II:1028 dental, III:1857 from diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1091 from drug therapy monitoring, II:1108 dyspnea from, IV:3035 with ECMO, II:1257 with ectopic pregnancy, II:1131 EGD and, II:1247 from electric brain stimulation, II:1146 from endarterectomy, II:1181 from endocarditis, II:1184 from endometrial biopsy, II:1187 from endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1199 after episiotomy, II:1223 of esophageal varices, IV:2969 with female genital mutilation, II:1307 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 with fractures, II:1363, 1364 gastrointestinal (See Gastrointestinal hemorrhage) from gastrostomy, III:1411 from hantaviruses, III:1508 from heart surgery, III:1544 from heart transplantation, III:1548 from heart valve repair, III:1550 hematocrit test for, III:1572 hemoptysis from, III:1588–1589 from hemorrhagic fevers, III:1590–1592 from hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 from hookworm disease, III:1667 from hysteroscopy, III:1768 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777, 1779 from immunosuppressive agents, III:1799 intracerebral (See Intracerebral hemorrhage) intracranial (See Intracranial hemorrhage) intraventricular with prematurity, IV:2707 3774 from respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 iron deficiency from, III:2191 from IUDs, III:1877 from kidney biopsy, III:1908 kidney failure from, I:44 from kidney transplantation, III:1922 lactic acid test for, III:1945 from laser surgery, III:1961 laser surgery for, III:1959 from leeches, III:1971 from leptospirosis, III:1982 from liver biopsy, III:2018 with liver cancer, III:2019 from liver cirrhosis, II:814 lobar, from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 lung, from mucormycosis, III:2232 from lung biopsy, III:2042 from lymphomas, III:2092 from macular degeneration, III:2075 from Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2102–2103 malnutrition from, III:2104 with measles, III:2139 with mifepristone, III:2186 from mushroom poisoning, III:2268 from myocardial resection, III:2288 from myomectomy, III:2293 from nasal papillomas, IV:2315 from nasal polyps, IV:2316 nasogastric suctioning and, IV:2320 from nephrectomy, IV:2332 normocytic anemia from, IV:2839 orthostatic hypotension from, IV:2411 from osteopetroses, IV:2424 from overhydration, IV:2449 oxytocin for, II:1108 from pacemaker implantation, IV:2454 from pancreatectomy, IV:2470 from pancreatitis, IV:2478 from paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 partial thromboplastin time for, IV:2507 from pelvic fractures, IV:2520 peritonitis from, IV:2556 from placenta previa, IV:2610–2611 from placental abruption, IV:2612–2613 portal vein bypass for, IV:2676 from postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2680 from prostate ultrasound, IV:2736 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2744 from pyloroplasty, IV:2792 recompression treatment for, IV:2826 reticulocyte count with, IV:2874, 2875 from retinal vein occlusion, IV:2878 from sex change surgery, IV:3011 from smallpox, IV:3096 from splenic trauma, IV:3141 stillbirth from, IV:3163 from stomach ulcers, V:3432 from stroke, IV:3195 subarachnoid (See Subarachnoid hemorrhage) from surgery, III:1427 after T & A, V:3326 from thoracic surgery, V:3289 from thrombocytopenia, V:3295 thrombocytosis and, V:3297 from thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 from trabeculectomy, V:3351 from transhepatic biliary catheterization, V:3370 after transurethral bladder resection, V:3375 from traumatic amputations, V:3377 tube compression for, V:3400 from uterine fibroids, V:3458 vaginal (See Vaginal bleeding) from ventricular assist devices, V:3498 from vitamin K deficiency, V:3519 from in vitro fertilization, III:1809 wilderness medicine for, V:3561–3562 from Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, V:3570 from wound flushing, V:3582 wound repair and, III:1936 from yellow fever, V:3591 See also Cerebral amyloid angiopathy; Hematologic diseases Hemorrhagic colitis, II:1235 Hemorrhagic cystitis, I:57, II:992 Hemorrhagic diarrhea, II:1235, 1236, 1354 Hemorrhagic disease of newborn, V:3519 Hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome, III:1508, 1592 Hemorrhagic fevers, III:1590–1593 Hemorrhagic gastritis, III:1406 Hemorrhagic retinopathy. See retinal vein occlusion Hemorrhoidectomy, II:1300 Hemorrhoids, I:210–211, III:1593–1595, 1594f anal itching from, III:1875 anoscopy for, I:214 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790 from constipation, II:905 digital rectal examination for, IV:2833 drugs for, I:275–276 vs. enterobiasis, II:1208 FOBT for, II:1302 iron deficiency anemia from, III:1860 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 aldolase and, I:99 amylase tests for, I:160 antenatal tests for, I:219 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311 ascites from, I:372, 373 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 autoimmune (See Autoimmune hepatitis) autopsy and, I:426 bleeding varices from, I:516 from blood transfusions, V:3367, 3369 carcinoembryonic antigen levels in, II:654 from cat-scratch disease, II:670 from chickenpox, II:750 cholestasis from, II:783 with cholesterol tests, II:794 from clenched fist injury, II:821 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:998, 1000 drug-induced, III:1607–1608 gammaglobulins from, III:1391 with glomerulonephritis, III:1461 hemophilia and, III:1585 from human parvovirus B19, II:1329 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 immunotherapy for, III:1791, 1792 jaundice from, III:1883, IV:2330 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 with kidney transplantation, III:1919 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2013 liver function tests for, III:2025–2027 liver scan for, III:2028 liver transplantation and, III:2028, 2030 in men, III:2167 with plastic surgery, IV:2621 PTHC for, IV:2533 from salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 substance abuse and, IV:3209 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3312 tube compression for, V:3399 viral (See Viral hepatitis) with XLA, V:3585 Hepatitis A, III:1595–1597, 1596 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 from Norwalk virus, II:1353 tests for, III:1610, 1611–1612 Hepatitis A IgM antibody test, III:1596 Hepatitis A vaccine children’s health and, II:762 gay and lesbian health and, III:1416 for STD prevention, IV:3022 Hepatitis A virus. See Hepatovirus Hepatitis B, III:1600–1602, 1601f from alcohol, III:1598 bleeding varices from, I:517 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 blood donor screening for, I:525 condom use and, II:882, IV:3023 cryoglobulin test for, II:962 with dialysis, II:1061 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 vs. hepatitis C, III:1602 from human bites, I:498 immunization for, II:762 immunologic deficiency syndromes and, III:1790 liver cancer from, III:2019, 2022 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023, 2024 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 perinatal, IV:2541–2543 phlebotomy for, IV:2580 from piercing and tattoos, IV:2599 postnecrotic cirrhosis from, II:815–816 tests for, III:1610–1612 TORCH test for, V:3338 Hepatitis B antibodies, III:1610, 1611 Hepatitis B core antibody, III:1610 Hepatitis B e-antigen, III:1611, 1612 Hepatitis B surface antigen, III:1601, 1610–1611, 1612, IV:2541 Hepatitis B vaccine children’s health and, II:762 gay and lesbian health and, III:1416 for STD prevention, IV:2819, 3022 Hepatitis B virus, III:1600–1602 with hepatitis D, III:1605 with hepatitis G, III:1609 tests for, III:1610–1612 Hepatitis C, III:1602–1605 bleeding varices from, I:517 blood donor screening for, I:525, 526 with dialysis, II:1061 vs. hepatitis D, III:1605 vs. hepatitis G, III:1609 liver cancer from, III:2019 phlebotomy for, IV:2580 from piercing and tattoos, IV:2599 postnecrotic cirrhosis from, II:815 ribavirin for, I:315 tests for, III:1611–1612 Hepatitis C antibodies, III:1611, 1612 Hepatitis C virus, III:1602–1603, 1611–1612 Hepatitis D, III:1605–1606 liver cancer from, III:2019 tests for, III:1611, 1612 Hepatitis D virus. See Hepatitis delta virus Hepatitis delta virus, III:1605–1606, III:1611, 1612 Hepatitis E, III:1608–1609 from Norwalk virus, II:1353 tests for, III:1611, 1612 Hepatitis E virus, III:1608–1609 Hepatitis F, III:1610 3775 Hepatitis F with NSAIDs, IV:2362 from pregnancy, IV:2696 sitz bath for, IV:3061 Hemosiderosis, III:1863, 1865 Hemostasis in hypercoagulation, III:1701 test of, I:514 Hemothorax chest drainage therapy for, II:743 with pleural effusion, IV:2629 Hen plant. See Plantain Henoch-Schoenlein purpura. See Allergic purpura HEP. See Hepatoerythopoietic porphyria Hepar sulphuris for abscesses, I:14 for carbuncle, I:537 for furunculosis, I:537 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Heparan sulfate, III:2229 Heparin for cardiac catheterization, II:657 challenge test, IV:2774, 2775 for coagulation disorders, I:250, II:829 in coronary artery bypass grafting, II:927 for deep vein thrombosis, II:1014 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for dialysis, II:1060 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for embolism, II:1171 with endarterectomy, II:1182 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hemorrhagic fevers, III:1592 for hypercoagulation, III:1702 for miscarriage prevention, IV:2837 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 with partial thromboplastin time, IV:2508 platelet aggregation test and, IV:2623 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 for retinal vein occlusion, IV:2879 after stroke, IV:3197 thyroxine levels and, V:3310 Hepatectomy, III:2020–2021 Hepatic artery, III:2029 Hepatic artery embolization, III:2021 Hepatic cancer. See Liver cancer Hepatic coma. See Liver encephalopathy Hepatic encephalopathy. See Liver encephalopathy Hepatic jaundice, III:1883, 1884 Hepatic toxicity. See Hepatoxicity Hepatic veins, I:517 Hepatitis abdominal fluid from, IV:2489 alcohol-induced, I:374 alcoholic, III:1597–1598 Hepatitis G Hepatitis G, III:1609–1610 liver cancer from, III:2019 tests for, III:1610 Hepatitis G virus. See GB hepatitis agents Hepatitis non-A, non-B. See Hepatitis C Hepatitis virus tests, III:1610–1612 Hepatitis viruses aplastic anemia from, I:337 myocarditis from, III:2289 Hepatoblastoma, III:2019 Hepatocellular carcinoma, III:2019 from hepatitis C, III:1603 liver biopsy for, III:2017 liver function tests for, III:2026 Hepatoerythopoietic porphyria, IV:2673 Hepatolithiasis, I:477 Hepatoma. See Hepatocellular carcinoma Hepatosplenomegaly, III:1412 Hepatovirus, III:1595, III:1596, III:1610–1612 Hepatoxicity with antiretroviral drugs, I:303 from dantrolene, III:2259 Herald patch, IV:2609 Herbal douching. See Douching Herbal medicine, III:1615–1620, 1617, V:3360 for acute stress disorder, I:49 for ADHD, I:413 for adrenal gland cancer, I:60 for AIDS, I:81 for alcoholism, I:98 for allergies, I:121 for amenorrhea, III:2171–2172 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:166 for anemia, I:184 for angina pectoris, I:196 for anosmia, I:215 aromatherapy in, I:348 for ascites, I:373 in ayurvedic practices, I:428, 431, 432 for balanitis, I:440 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for bladder stones, I:511 for brain tumors, I:573 for cancer, II:636–637 for carbuncle, I:537–538 with central nervous system depressants, II:689 for children, II:765 for chronic bronchitis, II:811 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for cocaine withdrawal, II:833 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 for contact dermititis, II:909–910 3776 for COPD, II:811 for cough, II:942 for croup, II:960 for cystitis, II:994 dermatitis from, II:1037 for detoxification, II:1042 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 drug interactions with, II:1102, 1103 for dyspnea, IV:3037 for ectopic pregnancy, II:1133 for emphysema, II:811 for fatigue, II:1297 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for furunculosis, I:537–538 for gastritis, III:1407 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for guinea worm extraction, III:1494 for headache, III:1524 for heartburn, III:1555 for hepatitis C, III:1604 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 hydrotherapy and, III:1691–1692 for indigestion, III:1814 for influenza, III:1835 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 Korean ginseng in, III:1455 for Lyme disease, III:2060 for mood disorders, III:2217 for nausea, IV:2326 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 for palpitations, IV:2466 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for papilledema, IV:2488 poisoning from, IV:2644 for psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 for sexual dysfunctions, II:1308–1309, IV:3017 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for smoke inhalation, IV:3103 for smoking cessation, IV:3106–3107 for snoring, IV:3113 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for stings, I:503 for stomatitis, IV:3171 for stress, IV:3186 for stress reduction, IV:3189, 3190 for substance abuse, IV:3211 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for warts, V:3549–3550 See also Chinese herbal drugs Herbal remedies. See Herbal medicine Herbal teas for E. coli infections, II:1237 for gonorrhea, III:1473 Herbal therapy. See Herbal medicine The Herball or General Historie of Plantes, III:1617 Herberden’s nodes. See Osteoarthritis Herbicides kidney damage from, IV:2337 multiple myeloma from, III:2239 Herbs. See Herbal medicine Hereditary coproporphyria, IV:2673 Hereditary diseases with acute leukemia, III:1987 addiction as, I:57, II:831 ADHD as, I:411 albinism as, I:89 alcoholism as, I:95 allergies as, I:116 Alzheimer’s disease as, I:135 amniocentesis for, I:154 amyloidosis as, I:161 amyotrohpic lateral sclerosis as, I:164–165 anemia and, I:182 ankylosing spondylitis as, I:209 autopsy for, II:1006 binge eating disorder as, I:481 birth defects and, I:491 brain tumors as, I:569, 571 cancer as, II:632, 633 coagulation disorders as, II:826, 827, 828 congenital adrenal hyperplasia as, II:884–885 congenital brain defects as, II:891 COPD as, II:809 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease as, II:951, 952–953 CVS for, II:798–799 with delusions, II:1023 depression as, II:1033 diabetes mellitus as, II:1049 DiGeorge’s syndrome as, II:1071–1072 Down syndrome as, II:1098, 1100–1101 dyslexia as, II:1114, 1115, 1116 emphysema as, II:809, 1172, 1175 endometrial cancer as, II:1188–1189 endometriosis as, II:1193 eye cancer as, II:1260 Fanconi’s syndrome as, II:1290, 1291 fibromyalgia as, II:1326 Friedreich’s ataxia as, II:1369 gallstones as, III:1388 generalized anxiety disorder as, III:1428 glaucoma as, III:1458 gout as, III:1476 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Hereditary leptocytosis. See Thalassemia Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy. See Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease Hereditary nephritis. See Alport’s syndrome Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies, II:733 Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, II:1188–1189, 1191 Hereditary nonspherocytic hemolytic anemias, IV:2793 Hereditary onycho-osteodysplasia. See Nail-patella syndrome Hereditary spherocytosis from hemolytic anemia, III:1580 polydactyly with, IV:2661 Hering, Constantine, III:1660, 1665–1666 Hering’s Laws of Cure, III:1660, 1665–1666 Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, I:90 Hermaphrodism from adrenal virilism, I:62 Hermaphroditism, III:1846–1848, 1847 from adrenal virilism, I:62 gynecomastia with, III:1497 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012 testicular surgery for, V:3262 Hernia, III:1622–1625, 1623 abdominal wall defect, I:6 from appendectomy, I:340 from bladder exstrophy, II:889 with circumcision, II:813 from constipation, II:905 hiatal (See Hiatal hernia) with hydroceles, III:1686 incisional (See Incisional hernia) intestinal obstruction from, III:1848 vs. lymphadenitis, III:2065 from obesity, IV:2374 pelvic floor (See Uterine prolapse) with peritoneal dialysis, I:46, II:1059 from urinary diversion, V:3453 Hernia repair, III:1624, III:1625–1627, 1626f Herniated disk, III:1627–1631 with cervical disk disease, II:710 chemonucleolysis for, II:738–739 disk removal for, II:1081 low back pain from, III:2031, 2033 magnetic resonance imaging for, III:2082 myelography for, III:2285 paralysis from, IV:2491 paresthesia from, IV:2365 vs. sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 sciatica from, IV:2964–2965 vs. spinal stenosis, IV:3136 Herniated nucleus pulposus. See Herniated disk GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Herniated spinal disk. See Herniated disk Hernioplasty, III:1625 Herniorrhaphy. See Hernia repair Heroics (Herbal medicine), III:1619 Heroin abuse of, IV:3207, 3209, 3210 amenorrhea from, I:146 with breastfeeding, III:1943 delirium from, II:1021, 1022 galactorrhea from, III:1375 with general anesthetics, I:189 gynecomastia from, III:1497 hypogonadism from, III:1738 methadone and, III:2181–2183 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 overdose, II:1105 with regional anesthetics, I:191 from substance abuse, IV:3209, 3210 thyroxine levels and, V:3310 withdrawal from, V:3572 Herpangina from coxsackieviruses, II:1212 sore throat from, IV:3118 Herpes. See Herpesviridae infections Herpes, genital. See Genital herpes Herpes B. See Herpes simplex Herpes febrilis. See Cold sore Herpes genitalis. See Genital herpes Herpes labialis. See Cold sore Herpes progenitalis. See Genital herpes Herpes simplex birth defects from, I:491 in cold sores, II:844 corneal ulcers from, II:922 encephalitis from, II:1178 in facial paralysis, I:461–462 foscarnet, I:316 genital herpes from, III:1440, IV:3020 herpetic gingivostomatitis from, IV:2546 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1632 meningitis from, III:2154 photosensitivity from, IV:2590 proctitis from, I:210, IV:2719 TORCH test for, V:3338 visual impairment from, V:3510 Herpes simplex encephalitis. See Encephalitis Herpes simplex type 1. See Herpes simplex Herpes simplex type 2 in cold sores, II:844 genital herpes from, III:1441, IV:3020 vulvar cancer and, V:3536 Herpes simplex virus with AIDS, I:77 cold sores from, II:844 condom use and, II:882 congenital brain defects from, II:891 3777 Herpes simplex virus hemoglobinopathies as, III:1577–1578 high cholesterol as, II:789 inflammatory bowel diseases as, II:956 jaundice from, III:1882 keratosis pilaris as, III:1907 lipidoses as, III:2003–2006 melanoma as, III:2096, 2099 motion sickness as, III:2218 multiple myeloma as, III:2239 myocardial ischemia as, III:1868 myopathies as, III:2294 neutropenia as, IV:2353 night terrors as, IV:2355 obsessive-compulsive disorder as, IV:2382 ophthalmoplegia as, IV:2394 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 paranoia as, IV:2493 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552 pernicious anemia as, IV:2558 pigmentation disorders as, IV:3077–3078 platelet function disorders as, IV:2626 polydactyly and syndactyly, IV:2660–2661 polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 precocious puberty as, IV:2691 prenatal testing for, II:798–799 prolonged QT syndrome as, IV:2724 psoriatic arthritis as, IV:2759 psychosis as, IV:2765 pulmonary hypertension as, IV:2785 rectal polyps as, IV:2834 renal tubular acidosis from, IV:2858 rheumatoid arthritis as, IV:2900 SCID as, IV:3009 scoliosis as, IV:2970, 2971 sideroblastic anemia as, IV:3048 speech disorders as, IV:3122, 3200 subarachnoid hemorrhage and, IV:3201 substance abuse as, IV:3207–3208 systemic lupus erythematosus as, IV:3232 torticollis as, V:3340 tremor as, V:3381 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 vitiligo as, V:3527 Wilm’s tumor and, V:3564 See also Birth defects; names of specific diseases Hereditary fructose intolerance. See Fructose intolerance Hereditary hemochromatosis. See Hemochromatosis Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 brain tumors from, I:569 from endocarditis, II:1183 Herpes simplex virus conjunctivitis from, II:902 genital herpes from, IV:3020 Herpes virus keratitis. See Herpetic keratitis Herpes zoster. See Shingles Herpesviridae amnesia from, I:152 corneal ulcers from, II:922 cytomegalovirus infections from, II:999 vs. Epstein-Barr virus, III:1824 Guillain-Barré syndrome from, III:1492 meningitis from, III:2153 otitis externa from, IV:2431 skin resurfacing and, IV:3080 TORCH syndrome from, V:3338 Tzanck preparation for, V:3424 Herpesviridae infections antiviral drugs for, I:315–316 with cancer, II:641 corneal damage from, II:919 erythema multiforme from, II:1226 gay and lesbian health and, III:1416 with liver transplantation, III:2030 salivary gland tumors from, IV:2933 skin lesions from, IV:3074 Herpesviruses. See Herpesviridae Herpetic gingivostomatitis, IV:2546, 2547–2548 Herpetic keratitis, III:1904 Herpetiformis, II:682 Herplex Liquifilm. See Idoxuridine Hers’ disease. See Glycogen storage diseases Hesperidin, for allergies, I:121 Heterocyclic antidepressants for bipolar disorder, I:488 for depression, II:1035 for mood disorders, III:2217 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 Heterologous transplantation, IV:3070 Heterophile antibody test, II:1224, III:2213 Heterotaxy, IV:3060 Heterotopic ossification, IV:3129, 3131 Heterotopic transplantation. See Liver transplantation Hetrazan. See Diethylcarbamazine Hex-A. See Hexosaminidase A Hexachlorophene, for prickly heat, IV:2717 Hexachlorophine, I:307, 308 N-hexane, IV:2552–2553 Hexosaminidase A, III:2004, V:3244, 3245 HFE gene, III:1572–1573 Hgb electrophoresis. See Hemoglobin electrophoresis hGH. See Somatotropin 3778 HHV-8. See Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus HI tests. See Hemagglutination inhibition antibody Hiatal hernia, III:1622–1625 bowel function and, I:565 with dicyclomine, I:309 ECMO for, II:1256 heartburn from, III:1553 lower esophageal ring with, III:2034 surgery for, III:1626–1627 upper GI series for, V:3438 Hib disease mental retardation from, III:2175 vaccination for, V:3465 Hib vaccine children’s health and, II:762 for epiglottitis, II:1221 for mental retardation prevention, III:2175 Hibiscus, for indigestion, III:1814 Hiccups, III:1631–1632 HICPAC. See Hospital Infection Control Practice Advisory Committee Hidden language yoga, III:1514 High altitude cerebral edema, I:132–134, V:3562 High altitude pulmonary edema, I:132–134, V:3562 High altitudes with 2,3-DPG tests, V:3420 anoxia from, I:216 COPD and, II:811 decompression sickness and, II:1009 emphysema with, II:1174 hemoglobin test for, III:1576 hyperbaric oxygen therapy for, III:1837 neonatal jaundice from, III:1883 pneumothorax from, IV:2642 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 High anal atresia. See Anal atresia High blood pressure. See Hypertension High cholesterol, II:786–788, II:786t with angina pectoris, I:195 with anticancer agents, I:248 atherosclerosis from, I:394 cholesterol-reducing agents for, II:789–791 with coronary heart disease, II:929 from dominant inheritance, I:491 heart attacks from, III:1532 in heart failure, III:1540 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706, 1707 in hypothyroidism, III:1756 in men, III:2165 myocardial ischemia from, III:1869 from obesity, IV:2374 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 retinal artery occlusion and, IV:2875, 2876 senior’s health and, IV:2996 High colonic. See Colonic irrigation High cranberry. See Cramp bark High density lipoprotein, II:1049 High density lipoprotein cholesterol. See HDL cholesterol lipoproteins High fat diet for gallbladder x-rays, III:1382 for stool fat test, IV:3173 High fiber diet, IV:2367 for angiomas, I:496 for brain tumors, I:574 for cancer, II:637 for constipation, II:907 for coronary heart disease, II:932 with digitalis, II:1075 vs. enema, II:1201 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 for hypoglycemia, III:1737 for hypothyroidism, III:1758 for IBS, III:1866, 1867 for intestinal polyps prevention, III:1851 for pelvic relaxation, IV:2524–2525 for rectal prolapse prevention, IV:2836 High-grade brain tumors. See Brain tumors High-intensity ultrasonography, I:2 High performance liquid chromatography with catecholamines tests, II:678 for sickle cell disease, IV:3044 High pressure liquid chromatography for vitamin E deficiency, V:3518 for vitamin tests, V:3521 High protein diet for Hartnup disease, III:1512 with kidney function tests, III:1912 High residue foods, I:565 High risk pregnancy, III:1632–1634, IV:2697 electronic fetal monitoring for, II:1161 prepregnancy counseling with, IV:2712 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012 See also specific conditions and disorders Higher cortical function. See Dominant functioning Higher Judo, II:1305 Highwaythorn. See Buckthorn Hilar mass, II:749 Hinduism vegetarianism and, V:3484–3485 yoga and, V:3595 Hip bursitis of, I:620 congenital abnormalities of, II:892–893 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for heartburn, III:1554 for hiatal hernias, III:1624 for indigestion, III:1815 for stomach ulcers, I:308 for ulcers, I:313–314 Histamine headache. See Cluster headache Histamine receptor blockers. See Histamine H2 antagonists Histamine receptors in allergic rhinitis, I:111, 113 in allergies, I:115, 118–119, 122 Histidinemia, I:149 Histiocytosis X, III:1638–1639 Histocompatibility testing, III:1921, V:3324–3325 Histoplasma capsulatum histoplasmosis from, III:1639, 1640 infection (See Histoplasmosis) Histoplasmosis, III:1639–1641, 1640f Addison’s disease from, I:53 cough from, II:941 systemic antifungal drugs for, I:267 Historia Plantarum, III:1616 Histrelin, for precocious puberty, IV:2691 Histrionic personality disorder, III:1764–1765, IV:2564–2567 HIT. See Holtzman inkblot test HIV, I:74, I:83, IV:3021, 3022 antenatal tests for, I:219 antiretroviral drugs for, I:303–304 aplastic anemia from, I:337 beta2-microglobulin test for, I:473 blood donor screening for, I:525, 526 brain tumors with, I:569 in breast milk, III:1943 with bronchiectasis, I:596 with bursitis, I:620 with candidiasis, II:646 carbuncle with, I:536 with chancroid, II:729 from clenched fist injury, II:821 condom use and, II:881, 882, IV:3023 with cytomegalovirus infections, II:998 with dialysis, II:1061 encephalitis from, II:1178 ethnic differences in, III:2200, 2201, 2202 furunculosis with, I:536 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415 hemophilia and, III:1585 with hemophilus infections, III:1586 with hepatitis B, III:1601 infection control and, III:1822 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 with liver transplantation, III:2029 in men, III:2167 MMR vaccine with, III:2256 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with mycobacterial infections, III:2276 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 paresthesia from, IV:2365 perinatal, IV:2541–2543 with plastic surgery, IV:2621 with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 protease inhibitors for, IV:2742 from rape and sexual assault, IV:2817, 2818 reverse transcriptase inhibitors for, IV:2358–2359 salivary gland tumors from, IV:2933 shingles and, IV:3031 from substance abuse, IV:3208 syphilis and, IV:3021, 3022, 3226, 3230 testicular cancer from, V:3257 tuberculosis and, V:3406, 3407 vulvar cancer from, V:3536 in women, V:3576 See also AIDS HIV-1 transactivating protein, III:1898 HIV-1 viruses, I:75, I:83 HIV-2 viruses, I:83 HIV infections, IV:3021, 3022 antiretroviral drugs for, I:303–304 antiviral drugs for, I:315–317 Guillain-Barré syndrome from, IV:2552 with IUDs, III:1876 myocarditis from, III:2289 risk of infection by entry site, I:74t substance abuse and, IV:3209 HIV nucleic acids, I:83 HIV reverse transcriptase, I:80, 82 Hives (Disease), III:1642–1643 from allergies, I:115, 116 in anaphylaxis, I:179 from azithromycin, I:242 from contrast media, II:876 from fluoroquinolones, II:1345, 1346 itching from, III:1874 from ondansetron, II:644 from physical allergy, IV:2592 from SSRIs, IV:2992 Hivid. See Zalcitabine HKD. See Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder HLA. See Human lymphocyte antigens HLA antigen tests, III:1680–1681 HLA DNA probes, III:1680–1681 HLA-DR antigens, III:1897 HMG-CoA inhibitors, II:789, 790, 791 HNP. See Herniated disk HNPP. See Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies Hoary plantain. See Plantain Hockey, concussion from, II:879, III:2135 3779 Hockey polymyalgia rheumatica of, IV:2666 socket (See Acetabulum) Hip bath. See Sitz bath Hip dislocation as congenital abnormality, II:892 from cutis laxa, II:978 Hip fractures exercise for, II:1365–1366 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 Hip joint arthroplasty for, I:361 arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 arthroscopy for, I:364 congenital abnormalities of, II:892–893 with juvenile arthritis, III:1894 in osteoarthritis, IV:2412 in sciatica, IV:2963 Hip prosthesis, III:1890, III:1891 Hip replacement arthroplasty, III:1890 arthrography for, I:361 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for osteoarthritis, IV:3001 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 Hip socket. See Acetabulum Hip surgery arthroplasty (See Hip replacement arthroplasty) for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 Hippocampus, I:135 Hippocrates, III:1616 fasting and, II:1293 on influenza, III:1834 massage and, III:2125 Hippophae rhamnoides. See Buckthorn Hiroshima, III:2092 Hirschsprung’s disease, III:1634–1636 Hirsutism, III:1636–1637 PCOS and, IV:2654–2656 sex hormone tests for, IV:3013, 3014 Hirudin, from leeches, III:1971 Hirudo medicinalis, III:1971 Hirudo michaelseni, III:1971 Hismanal. See Astemizole Histamine in allergic rhinitis, I:111 in allergies, I:115, 118–119, 120–121, 122 in anaphylaxis, I:179 in asthma, I:380 cluster headache from, II:824 decongestants and, II:1010–1011 in fish poisoning, II:1335 hives from, III:1642 in itching, I:285 in mastocytosis, III:2132 Histamine antagonists, IV:2723 Histamine H2 antagonists vs. antacids, I:218 for gastrinomas, III:1404 for gastroesophageal reflux, I:272 Hodgkin, Thomas Hodgkin, Thomas, III:1643 Hodgkin’s disease, III:1643–1649, 1647, III:2092 with amyloidosis, I:161 autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 bone marrow transplantation for, I:550 CAT scan for, II:878 causes and symptoms of, III:1644 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 cryptococcosis with, II:964 diagnosis of, III:1644–1646 gallium scan for, III:1384 gay health and, III:1415 incidence of, III:1644 itching from, III:1874 laparoscopy for, III:1948 liver function tests for, III:2027 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 lymphography for, III:2066 mediastinoscopy for, III:2143, 2145 prognosis for, III:1648–1649 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 radiation therapy for, II:639, IV:2810, 2813 splenectomy for, IV:3138 subtypes of, III:1644 treatment for, III:1646–1648 tumor removal for, V:3416 tumor staging for, III:1645–1646 Hodgkin’s lymphoma. See Hodgkin’s disease Holism in human potential movement, III:1676 in osteopathy, IV:2422 Holistic aromatherapy. See Aromatherapy Holistic medicine, III:1649–1653 Holligold. See Calendula Holly poisoning, IV:2644 Holocaust survivors, IV:2685 Holoprosencephaly, II:890 Holter monitoring. See Ambulatory electrocardiography Holtzman, Wayne, III:1655 Holtzman inkblot test, III:1655–1656, IV:2764 Home Access test system, I:83 Home care for RSV, IV:2868 for strep throat, IV:3179 Home environment for conduct disorder, II:883 PSP and, IV:2722 for RMSF prevention, IV:2911 for stress prevention, IV:3185 Home hemodialysis, II:1060 Home pregnancy tests. See Pregnancy tests, for home Home safety, for poisoning prevention, IV:2645 3780 Home testing kits, for AIDS, I:83 Homeless persons hypothermia of, III:1753 with lice, III:1994, 1996 substance abuse and, IV:3206 trench fever in, V:3383 Homeopathic medicine. See Homeopathy Homeopathic reasearch, III:1666 Homeopathic remedies. See Homeopathy Homeopathy, III:1663–1667, 1664t, 1665 acute prescribing, III:1656–1659 for acute stress disorder, I:49 for ADHD, I:413 for adrenal gland cancer, I:60 for AIDS, I:81 for allergies, I:121 for anosmia, I:215 for anxiety, I:321 for anxiety disorders, I:324 aromatherapy in, I:351 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for brain tumors, I:573 for bronchitis, I:600 for bruises, I:608 for cancer, II:636–637 for chickenpox, II:751 for chronic bronchitis, II:811 for cluster headache, II:825 for common cold, II:872 for congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 for conjunctivitis, II:904 for constipation, II:907 constitutional prescribing, III:1659–1663 for contact dermititis, II:910 for COPD, II:811 for cough, II:942 for croup, II:960 for cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:981 for cystitis, II:994 for depression, II:1035 development of, III:1618 for diarrhea, II:1067 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2247 for dizziness, II:1096 for dyspnea, IV:3037 for emphysema, II:811 for endometriosis, II:1194 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 flower remedies and, II:1338 for food poisoning, II:1356 for fractures, II:1365 for furunculosis, I:537 for gallstones, III:1390 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 for genital herpes, III:1443 for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 for hearing loss, III:1530 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 for hypoglycemia, III:1736 for indigestion, III:1814 for influenza, III:1835 ipecac and, III:1857–1859 for laryngitis, III:1958 for lead poisoning, III:1968 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 for Lyme disease, III:2060 for mood disorders, III:2217 for motion sickness, III:2219 for movement disorders, III:2224 for multiple pregnancy, III:2249 for mumps, III:2256 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 for ovarian cysts, IV:2446–2447 for palpitations, IV:2466 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for psoriasis, IV:2758 for psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for shingles, IV:3032 for smoke inhalation, IV:3103 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 for stings, I:503 for stress reduction, IV:3190 for syphilis, IV:3230 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for tennis elbow, V:3253 for urethritis, V:3441 for withdrawal, I:52 Homeostasis in families, II:1288 homeopathy and, III:1665 in life support, III:1999, 2000 Homicide, in men, III:2165 Homocysteine, in atherosclerosis, I:394 Homocystinuria amino acid screening for, I:149 vitamins for, V:3526 Homologous transplantation. See Allografts Homosexuality anorexia nervosa and, I:212 health and (See Gay and lesbian health) hepatitis A and, III:1596 hepatitis B and, III:1600, 1602 hepatitis D and, III:1605 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 with lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071 as mental disorder, III:1416 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for hypopituitarism, III:1749 after hysterectomy, III:1763 for kyphosis prevention, III:1932 with macular degeneration, III:2076 for menopause, III:2160–2162 as migraine trigger, III:2188 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 after pituitary surgery, IV:2608 postmenopausal bleeding and, IV:2679–2681 for premature menopause, IV:2703 after salpingo-oophorectomy, IV:2939 for senior’s health, IV:2999, 3000 for sexual dysfunctions, II:1308, IV:3017 for thyroiditis, V:3319 for urethritis prevention, V:3441 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 for vaginal pain, V:3469 Hormone tests for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885–886 with neurologic examination, IV:2352 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3016 Hormone therapy with adrenalectomy, I:60, 63, 64 for anemia, I:183 for cancer, II:635 carcinoembryonic antigen test with, II:653 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885–886 for endometriosis, II:1194 galactorrhea from, III:1375 for gender identity disorder, III:1418 for gynecomastia, III:1498 for hermaphroditism, III:1847 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 for hyperphosphatemia, IV:2585 with lumpectomy, III:2037 with mastectomy, III:2130 with myomectomy, III:2293 for oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472 for platelet function disorders, IV:2626 for PMS, IV:2710 for polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 for precocious puberty, IV:2691 for prostate cancer, IV:2733 serum sickness from, IV:3008 for thyroid cancer, V:3307–3308 for thyroiditis, V:3319 Hormones adrenal cortex (See Corticosteroids) with aging, I:69, 71 amenorrhea from, I:146 anaphylaxis from, I:179 birth defects from, I:490 canker sores from, II:648 in congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 ectopic pregnancy and, II:1131 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 follicle stimulating, III:1926 growth (See Growth hormones) infertility from, III:1808, 1809 luteinizing, III:1926 in oral contraceptives, IV:2401 pituitary, IV:2607 PMS from, IV:2710 sex (See Sex hormones) tests for for carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 in multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236–2237 thyroid (See Thyroid hormones) in varicose veins, V:3476 Hormones, androgens. See Androgens Hornet hives, III:1642 Horse chestnut poisoning, IV:2644 Horse serum, IV:3008 Horseradish, for sinusitis, IV:3059 Horsetail for bed-wetting, I:455 for bladder stones, I:511 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 Horton’s disease. See Cluster headache Hospice care, III:2271 Hospital-acquired infections. See Cross infection Hospital Infection Control Practice Advisory Committee, III:1872 Hospitalization for anorexia nervosa, I:212–213 antibiotic-associated colitis from, I:238 for concussion, II:880 delirium with, II:1020 for embolism, II:1171 for food poisoning, II:1356 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 infection control for, III:1821–1823 for lung abscess, III:2039 malnutrition from, III:2104 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2407 patient isolation and, III:1872–1873 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for postpartum depression, IV:2682 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2744 for psychosis evaluation, IV:2766 for psychosocial disorders, IV:2768–2769 for pyelonephritis, IV:2789 for RMSF, IV:2911 for rotaviruses, IV:2922 for RSV, IV:2868 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 3781 Hospitalization with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 proctitis and, I:210, IV:2718 Honey for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 infant botulism from, I:560, 562, II:1355 Honey plant. See Lemon balm Honeysuckle, for acne, I:26 HOOD. See Nail-patella syndrome Hooded willow herb. See Skullcap Hoodwart. See Skullcap Hoodwort. See Skullcap Hook-up, in Tragerwork, V:3361, 3362 Hookworm disease, III:1667–1668 antihelminthic drugs for, I:273, 275 iron deficiency anemia from, III:1860 itching from, III:1874 Hops for drug addictions, II:833 for insomnia, III:1845 for PMS, IV:2711 Hordeolum. See Stye Hormone disorders adrenal virilism from, I:62 blood glucose tests for, I:529 congenital adrenal hyperplasia from, II:884–885 dysfunctional uterine bleeding from, II:1112 electrolyte imbalance from, II:1157 galactorrhea from, III:1375 hermaphroditism from, III:1847 hyperhidrosis from, III:1704 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 luteinizing hormone test for, III:2056 menorrhagia from, III:2170 miscarriage from, III:2204 PCOS and, IV:2654–2656 premature menopause from, IV:2702–2703 See also specific disorders Hormone replacement therapy, III:1668–1673, 1671f aging and, I:70 vs. bone disorder agents, I:542 breast cancer from, I:578 with corticosteroids, II:935 with corticotropin, II:936 edema from, II:1134 for endometrial cancer, II:1190–1191 endometrial cancer and, II:1188 fibrocystic breasts from, II:1323 with fludrocortisone, II:936 for fractures, II:1366 gallstones with, II:779 headache from, III:1523 for hypogonadism, III:1738 after hypophysectomy, III:1745 Hospitalization for substance withdrawal, V:3573 technetium heart scan and, V:3246 for thalassemia, I:183 for traction, V:3357 Host-vs.-graft disease. See Organ rejection Hostility, from dissociative identity disorder, III:2245 Hot baths. See Hydrotherapy Hot beverages, with rosacea, IV:2918 Hot packs. See Heat treatment Hot peppers, for deviated septum, II:1045 Hot spot myocardial imaging. See Technetium heart scan House mites. See Mites Household chemicals. See Chemicals Housemaid’s knee. See Bursitis Howell, Edward, II:1214 Hoxsey formulas, III:1648 HPLC. See High performance liquid chromatography HPPD. See Flashbacks HPRT gene, III:1983 HPS. See Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome HPV. See Papillomavirus HRT. See Hormone replacement therapy HSG. See Hysterosalpingography HSV. See Herpes simplex virus HSV-1. See Herpes simplex HSV-2. See Herpes simplex type 2 HTLV-I blood donor screening for, I:525, 526 in chronic leukemia, III:1991 leukemia from, III:1987 with lymphomas, III:2093 tropical spastic paraparesis from, V:3394, 3395 HTLV-II blood donor screening for, I:525, 526 in chronic leukemia, III:1991 Huang chi. See Milk vetch Huang-lian, III:1465 Hulka clip, for tubal ligation, V:3397 Hull House, IV:2387 Human albumin protein, IV:2619 Human bite infections, III:1677–1678 Human botulism. See Botulism Human botulism immune globulin. See Botulism immune globulin Human chorionic gonadotropin from choriocarcinomas, II:797, 798 for infertility, III:1830 for PCOS, IV:2655 in testicular cancer, V:3258 for in vitro fertilization, III:1809 Human chorionic gonadotropin test, III:1678–1680 with alpha fetoprotein test, I:127 3782 for birth defects, II:800 for ectopic pregnancy, II:1132 for hydatidiform mole, III:1684–1685 for pregnancy, IV:2697 Human diploid cell vaccine, IV:2801–2802 Human erythropoietin. See Erythropoietin Human Genome Project, III:1422, 1424 Human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, II:1142 Human growth hormone. See Somatotropin Human herpesvirus 8. See Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus Human immune globulin, I:208 Human immunodeficiency virus. See HIV Human immunodeficiency viruses. See HIV Human leukocyte antigen test. See HLA DNA probes Human lymphocyte antigens bone marrow transplantation and, I:550–551 histocompatibility testing for, V:3324 Human menopausal gonadotropins. See Menotropins Human milk, III:1942, 1943 in galactorrhea, III:1375 iron deficiency and, III:2191 with mastitis, III:2131 See also Lactation Human monocytic ehrlichiosis, II:1142 Human papillomavirus. See Papillomavirus Human parvovirus B19 fifth disease from, II:1328 TORCH test for, V:3338 Human potential movement, III:1676–1677 Human rabies immune globulin, IV:2801–2802 Human RH immune globulin, III:1883 Human t-cell leukemia virus. See HTLV-I Humanistic therapy, III:1676–1677 Humatin. See Paromomycin Humegon. See Menotropins Humerus in rotator cuff injuries, IV:2920, 2921 sarcomas of, IV:2942 Humidifier lung, III:1717 Humidifiers for asbestosis, I:370 for bronchitis, I:599 for croup, II:960 for dry mouth, II:1109 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for respiratory secretions, II:1254 for RSV, IV:2868 for sinusitis, IV:3059 after tracheotomy, V:3354 Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy. See Hypercalcemia Humorsol. See Demecarium Humulus. See Hops Humulus lupulus. See Hops Hunchback. See Kyphosis Hunter syndrome. See Mucopolysaccharidoses Huntington disease, III:1682–1684 dementia from, II:1025 from dominant inheritance, I:491 gene therapy for, III:1422 genetic counseling for, III:1429 movement disorders from, III:2221 MRI for, III:2082 PET scan for, IV:2677 presymptomatic testing for, III:1436 sleep disorders from, I:308 Huntington’s chorea. See Huntington disease Hurler-Scheie syndrome, III:2228 Hurler syndrome. See Mucopolysaccharidoses HUS. See Hemolytic uremic syndrome HUS/TTP, II:1235, 1236 Hutt Adaptation of the Bender-Gestalt test, I:465 Hyacinth poisoning, IV:2643 Hyalin, in arteriovenous malformations, I:357 Hyaline membrane disease, III:2247–2248 Hyaline membranes in ARDS, I:67 in respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2863 Hyaluronic acid, for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 Hyaluronidase deficiency, III:2230 in streptococcal antibody tests, IV:3182 Hydantoins, I:253 Hydatid cysts. See Echinococcosis Hydatid disease. See Echinococcosis Hydatidiform mole, III:1684–1685 Hydergine for Alzheimer’s disease, II:1026 with bronchodilators, I:602 Hydralazine cholestasis from, II:784 for diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1071 for hypertension, I:279–281 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788 pleurisy from, IV:2631 race differences and, IV:2573 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for corticotropic hormone deficiency, III:1749 with corticotropin, I:64–65 general adaptation syndrome and, III:1425 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for seborrheic dermatitis, IV:2981 topical antibiotics and, I:245–246 HydroDIURIL. See Hydrochlorothiazide Hydroflumethiazide, I:279–281 Hydrogen in hyperkalemia, III:1705 in MRI, III:2083 Hydrogen breath test for carbohydrate intolerance, II:650 for lactose intolerance, III:1946 Hydrogen chloride electrolyte imbalance from, II:1158 with gastric lavage, IV:3169 vagotomy for, V:3470 Hydrogen-ion concentration in acidosis, III:2179 metabolic alkalosis from, III:2180 Hydrogen peroxide, IV:2451 as antiseptic, I:307 for cerumen impaction, II:710 in chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 vitamin E deficiency and, V:3518 Hydrogen peroxide, IV:2450 Hydrogenated fats, III:1708 Hydrolyses, for herniated disk, III:1630 Hydromorphone, for pain, I:175 Hydronephrosis, III:1689–1690 from congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 from kidney stones, III:1916–1917 Hydrophobia. See Rabies Hydrops fetalis, II:1229, III:1578 Hydroquinone, for skin resurfacing, IV:3080 Hydrotherapy, III:1690–1694, 1692, III:1693, III:1693 for AIDS, I:81 for anosmia, I:215 for anxiety, I:321 for anxiety disorders, I:324 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for brain tumors, I:573 for bronchitis, I:600 for chronic bronchitis, II:811 contrast (See Heat/cold application) for COPD, II:811 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 for emphysema, II:811 for frostbite, II:1372 for gout, III:1478 for heat treatment, III:1559 immobilization and, III:1782 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for indigestion, III:1814 for influenza, III:1835 for mood disorders, III:2217 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for pain, IV:2460 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for papilledema, IV:2488 for pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2569 for pleurisy, IV:2632 with rehabilitation, IV:2846–2847 for restless legs syndrome prevention, IV:2871 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 for stress reduction, IV:3190 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for tendinitis, V:3251 See also Fluid therapy; Therapeutic baths Hydrothorax, IV:2490 Hydroureter with hydronephrosis, III:1689 from kidney stones, III:1917 Hydroxocobalamin, V:3526 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitors for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 Hydroxyapatite, I:544, IV:2455 Hydroxychloroquine for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for protozoan infections, I:298 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, 306 Hydroxydoxorubicin. See Doxorubicin Hydroxymethylbilane synthase gene, IV:2672 Hydroxyurea for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 for priapism, IV:2715 for sickle cell disease, IV:3046–3047 for thrombocytosis, V:3297 Hydroxyzine for allergies, I:278 for insomnia, I:282 for itching, I:284–286 Hygiene for acne, I:26, 27 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:138, 139 with athlete’s foot, I:399 for bacteremia, I:436 with balanitis, I:439–440 in balantidiasis, I:441 with Bartholin’s gland cyst, I:450 for carbuncle, I:536, 537 for cold sores, II:846 with cough, II:943 for cryptosporidiosis, II:967 for cyclosporiasis, II:982 cystitis from, II:992 in dementia, II:1025 for enteral nutrition, V:3402 3783 Hygiene systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3233 for vasodilation, V:3482 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 Hydramnios. See Polyhydramnios Hydranencephaly, II:890 Hydrangea, for bladder stones, I:511 Hydrasitis canadensis. See Goldenseal Hydrastis. See Goldenseal Hydrastis canadensis. See Goldenseal; Goldenseal Hydrazine sulfate endometrial cancer and, II:1191 for Paget’s disease of the breast, III:2158 Hydrea. See Hydroxyurea Hydrex. See Thiazide diuretics Hydrocarbons ARDS from, I:67 with gastric lavage, IV:3169 Goodpasture’s syndrome from, III:1475 Hydrocele, III:2167 circumcision with, II:813 surgery for, III:1685–1686 ultrasound for, IV:2975 Hydrocelectomy, III:1685–1686 Hydrocephalus, III:1686–1688 from achondroplasia, I:22 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 CAT scan for, II:877 cerebral palsy, II:705 in congenital brain defects, II:890 environmental causes, I:492 fetal surgery for, I:492–493 genetic causes, I:492 from head injuries, III:1522 from immaturity, IV:2706 mental retardation from, III:2175 papilledema from, IV:2488 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 ventricular shunts for, V:3502 Hydrochloric acid. See Hydrogen chloride Hydrochlorothiazide drug interactions with, II:1102 for edema, II:1088 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypertension, I:279–281 Hydrochlorothiazide-triamterene, II:1088 Hydrocodone, for pain, I:175 Hydrocodone-acetaminophen, I:175 Hydrocortisone, II:935 for Addison’s disease, I:54 adrenal gland cancer and, I:59–60 for adrenal virilism, I:62 for calluses, II:924 with congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:884–885, 886 Hygiene for enterobacterial infection prevention, II:1206–1207 for enteroviruses prevention, II:1213 for furunculosis, I:536, 537 giardiasis from, III:1450–1451 granuloma inguinale and, III:1483 hand-foot-mouth disease and, III:1507 with hemophilus infections, III:1588 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for hepatitis A prevention, III:1597 for hepatitis C, III:1604 with immunologic deficiency syndromes, III:1791 immunologic diseases and, III:1787 for impetigo prevention, III:1802 for infection control, III:1822 with keratitis, III:1906 with lice, III:1995, 1996 for listeriosis, III:2012, 2014 for mastitis, III:2132 for nephritis, IV:2334 oral (See Oral hygiene) for penile cancer prevention, IV:2530 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 for polio prevention, IV:2648 prostatitis from, IV:2740, 2742 for relapsing fever prevention, IV:2853 for roseola, IV:2920 for rotaviruses, IV:2922–2923 for roundworm infections prevention, IV:2925 for salmonella food poisoning, IV:2936, 2937 for scabies prevention, IV:2949, 2950 for skin lesions prevention, IV:3077 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for STD prevention, IV:3023 for strongyloidiasis prevention, V:3292–3293 for tetanus prevention, V:3265 trench fever and, V:3383, 3384 of umbilical cord, II:1237 for yersiniosis prevention, V:3593 Hygroton. See Chlorthalidone Hymen, imperforate, I:147 Hymenolepis diminuta, V:3240 Hymenolepis nana, V:3240, 3241 Hyoscine butylbromide, IV:2969 Hyoscyamine for IBS, III:1867 for Parkinson disease, I:296 Hyperacidity, I:218 Hyperactivity attention deficit disorder (See Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) with barbiturates, I:446 with benzodiazepines, I:468 in bipolar disorder, I:486–487 from catatonic excitement, II:676 3784 from lead poisoning, III:1966 in mania, III:2112 Hyperaldosteronism, III:1694–1696 aldosteronism, I:100–101 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 hypokalemia from, III:1740 periodontitis from, IV:2547 plasma renin activity for, IV:2617–2618 Hyperalgesia, IV:2459 Hyperalimentation, I:213 Hyperandrogenism, IV:2654–2655 Hyperbaric oxygenation, III:1837–1841, IV:2450–2451, 2826 for actinomycosis, I:35 for burns, I:619 for CO poisoning, II:652 for decompression sickness, II:1010 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for gangrene, III:1395 from gas embolism, III:1396 for retinal artery occlusion, IV:2875 for smoke inhalation, IV:3102 Hyperbilirubinemia, IV:2330–2331 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1229 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 jaundice from, III:1881 from sulfonamides, I:490 See also Neonatal jaundice Hypercalcemia, III:1696–1698 constipation from, II:906 dementia from, II:1024 from electrolyte disorders, II:1154 electrolyte tests for, II:1158 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713, 1714 from hypocalcemia therapy, III:2196 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 from multiple myeloma, III:2240 parathyroid hormone test for, IV:2494 urinalysis for, V:3446 from vitamin D toxicity, V:3522 Hypercapnia, II:1021, IV:2866 Hypercholesterolemia, III:1698–1701, III:1706, IV:2748 Hypercoagulability, IV:2879 Hypercoagulation disorders, III:1701–1702 Hypercortisolism. See Cushing’s syndrome Hyperdefecation, II:1065 Hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1702–1703, III:1930 Hyperglycemia blood glucose tests for, I:528–530 from diabetes mellitus, II:1048 diabetic ketoacidosis and, II:1055 vs. hypoglycemia, III:1734 Hyperhidiosis, I:558 Hyperhidrosis, III:1703–1704 Hyperhydrosis, IV:2840 Hypericum perforatum. See St. John’s wort Hyperimmunization reaction, III:1789 Hyperinsulinemia, IV:2654–2655 Hyperkalemia, III:1704–1706 electrolyte tests for, II:1158 from hypokalemia therapy, III:2196 from potassium toxicity, III:2193–2194 Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, IV:2544–2545 Hyperketonemia, II:1055 Hyperkinesis, III:2222, 2223 Hyperkinetic disorder. See Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Hyperlactation. See Galactorrhea Hyperlipemia. See Hyperlipidemia Hyperlipidemia, III:1706 ACE test and, I:205 from obesity, IV:2373, 2378 retinal vein occlusion with, IV:2878 Hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706–1709 type I (See Familial lipoprotein lipase deficiency) type II (See Familial hypercholesteremia) Hypermagnesemia, III:2079 from electrolyte disorders, II:1155, 1156 electrolyte tests for, II:1158 from laxatives, III:1964 Hypermetabolism beriberi and, I:469 from hyperthyroidism, V:3317 Hypermobility, II:1138 Hypernatremia, III:1709–1711 in electrolyte disorders, II:1153 electrolyte tests for, II:1158 from hyponatremia therapy, III:2196 from sodium, III:2194 Hyperopia, III:1711–1713, 1711f from albinism, I:89 vs. astigmatism, I:384–385 eyeglasses and contact lenses for, II:1265 Hyperopic shift, IV:2806 Hyperosmia, IV:3098 Hyperosmotic agents, for glaucoma, III:1459 Hyperosmotic laxatives, III:1964 Hyperoxaluria, kidney stones from, III:1917 Hyperparathyroidism, III:1713–1714 acid phosphatase test for, I:23 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 hypercalcemia from, III:1697, 1698 hypophosphatemia from, IV:2585 kidney stones from, III:1917 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 neonatal magnesium deficiency from, III:2079 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 arteriovenous malformation hemorrhage from, I:357 atherosclerosis and, I:393, 394, 397 Atkins diet and, I:402 in autonomic dysreflexia, IV:3130 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 beta blockers for, I:474 biofeedback for, I:482 with blepharoplasty, I:518 blood transfusions and, V:3367, 3369 with breast reconstruction, I:586 bronchodilators with, I:602 caffeine with, II:626 calcium channel blockers for, II:627–629 with cardiac rehabilitation, II:659–660 from catecholamines, II:677 celiac and mesenteric angiography for, I:198 with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 cesarean section with, II:724, 758 chemonucleolysis and, II:739 with cholesterol tests, II:792 with chronic glomerulonephritis, III:1462 chronic kidney failure and, II:807 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 control of, III:1536, IV:2878 with coronary heart disease, II:929 with decongestants, II:1011–1012 with diabetes mellitus, II:1049 with dicyclomine, I:309 diuretics for, II:1088 dizziness from, II:1094 with dronabinol, II:644 drugs for, I:279–281 with eclampsia, III:2197 eclampsia/preeclampsia and, IV:2692 from edema, II:1134 with endarterectomy, II:1180 endometrial cancer and, II:1188 from epoetin, II:645 with epoetin, II:643, III:1793 from escherichia coli, III:1580 ethnic differences in, III:2199 eye examination and, II:1262 from gout, III:1479 with gout drugs, III:1480 heart attacks from, III:1532 heart failure from, III:1538 with heart transplantation, III:1545 from hemolytic uremic syndrome, II:1205 high-risk pregnancy and, III:1632 from HRT, III:1673 from hyperaldosteronism, III:1694 from immunosuppressive agents, III:1799, 1922 induced labor with, III:1816 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 intracranial (See Intracranial hypertension) from kidney biopsy, III:1908 from kidney cancer, III:1909 kidney failure and, I:44, II:807 from lead poisoning, III:1966 liver scan for, III:2028 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214, 2215 from MAOs, I:256–257 meditation for, III:2148, V:3594 in men, III:2165, 2166 mental retardation from, III:2174–2175 minoxidil for, III:2202 from mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 music therapy for, III:2269 myocardial ischemia from, III:1869 from nephritis, IV:2334 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335, 2336 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 from neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 from obesity, IV:2373, 2378 with oral contraceptives, III:2099, IV:2402 with oxytocin, II:1108 with penicillins, IV:2528 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 placental abruption from, IV:2612 plasma renin activity for, IV:2618, 2619 from polycystic kidney disease, IV:2652 portal (See Portal hypertension) potassium for, III:2196 protease inhibitors and, IV:2742 renal artery occlusion with, IV:2855 renal artery stenosis with, IV:2856, 2857 renovascular (See Renovascular hypertension) with respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 retinal artery occlusion with, IV:2875, 2876 retinal vein occlusion with, IV:2878 from schistosomiasis, IV:2954 secondary polycythemia and, IV:2982 from sedation, IV:2984 senior’s health and, IV:2996 sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 from smoking, IV:3104 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 from steroids, III:1774 from stress, III:1425 subarachnoid hemorrhage and, IV:3202 3785 Hypertension parathyroid hormone test for, IV:2494–2495 parathyroidectomy for, IV:2497 Hyperphagia colic from, II:847 hiccups from, III:1632 nausea from, IV:2325 palpitations from, IV:2465 Hyperphidrosis, IV:3224, 3225 Hyperphosphatemia, IV:2584–2587 aluminum carbonate for, I:218 from electrolyte disorders, II:1155 electrolyte tests for, II:1159 Hyperpigmentation, III:1714–1716, IV:3078 from chickenpox, II:750 from cryotherapy, II:964 Hyperpituitarism, III:1488 Hyperplasia adenoid, I:55–56 adrenal, III:1695 atypical ductal, II:1324 endometrial biopsy for, II:1186 epithelial, II:1323 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 uterine tissue, III:1673 Hyperprolinemia amino acid screening for, I:149 Hyperreflexia, III:2023 Hyperreflexic bladder. See Neurogenic bladder Hypersensitivity. See Allergy Hypersensitivity pneumonitis. See Extrinsic allergic alveolitis Hypersomnia, I:486, IV:3087 Hypersplenism, III:1718–1719 from hemolytic anemia, III:1579 platelet count for, IV:2625 splenectomy for, IV:3137 Hypertension, III:1720–1723, 1721 ACE inhibitors for, I:202–205 ACE test for, I:205 from acute kidney failure, I:44 adrenal gland scan for, I:61 from adrenal tumors, I:60, 63 from allergic purpura, I:110 alpha1-adrenergic blockers, I:129 from Alport’s syndrome, I:131 with angina pectoris, I:196 with antacids, I:218 antepartum tests with, I:221 antihistamines and, I:278 with antimigraine agents, I:290 aortic aneurysm from, I:326 from aortic coarctation, II:830 aortic dissection with, I:327 aortic valve insufficiency from, I:328 from APSGN, I:48 aromatherapy for, I:349 arrhythmia from, II:679 Hypertension with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 thyroid hormones and, V:3313 with TIA, V:3371 from transurethral prostate resection, II:1203 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 ultrasonography for, I:4 from vasculitis, V:3479 vasodilators for, V:3482–3484 from vesicoureteral reflux, V:3505 See also Antihypertensive agents; Intracranial hypertension Hypertensive retinopathy, IV:2890 Hyperthermia. See Heat stress disorders Hyperthyroid drugs with antimalarials, I:288 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 Hyperthyroid goiter. See Goiter Hyperthyroid myopathy, III:2294–2295 Hyperthyroidism, III:1724–1726 2,3-DPG test for, V:3420 alopecia from, I:125 amenorrhea from, III:2169 with antiangina agents, I:230 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 antihistamines and, I:278 anxiety from, I:318 with barbiturates, I:446 with beta blockers, I:476 bronchodilators with, I:602 cholinergic agents with, II:794 cortisol test for, II:938 with creatinine test, II:950 with decongestants, II:1011 delirium from, II:1020 with dicyclomine, I:309 exophthalmos from, II:1252 with goiter, III:1470 from hydatidiform mole, III:1684 hypolipoproteinemia from, III:1741 from iodine toxicity, III:2194 kidney stones from, III:1917 from lithium, I:487 low cholesterol from, II:794 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 mental retardation from, III:2174, 2175, 2176 paroxysmal atrial tachycardia from, IV:2505 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 RAIU for, V:3314 sex hormone tests for, IV:3013, 3014 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 thyroid function tests for, V:3309–3312 thyroid hormones and, V:3313 thyroidectomy for, V:3317 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 vitiligo with, IV:3078 3786 Hyperthyroidism chemotherapy for, IV:2807–2808 dyspnea from, IV:3036 Hypertriglyceridemia, III:1706 Hypertriglyceridemia tests, V:3393–3394 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, II:1129, III:1726–1727 Hypertrophic rhinitis, IV:3099 Hypertrophic scars. See Keloids Hypertrophy from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 neurologic examination for, IV:2352 Hypertropia. See Strabismus Hyperuricemia drugs for (See Antihyperuricemic drugs) gout from, III:1476–1477, 1478 uric acid tests for, V:3442 Hypervalinemia, I:149 Hyperventilation ambulatory electrocardiography for, III:1654 vs. barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 from dyspnea, IV:3035 with hypoxemia, I:133 phosphorus imbalance from, IV:2585 with respiratory alkalosis, IV:2862 for Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 Hyperviscosity from multiple myeloma, III:2240, 2243 plasmapheresis for, IV:2620 retinal vein occlusion with, IV:2879 Hyperviscosity syndrome, V:3544 Hypervitaminosis. See Vitamin toxicity Hypervolemia, I:266–267 Hyphema, III:1727–1728 Hyplatid disease. See Echinococcosis Hypnagogic hallucinations. See Hallucinations Hypnopompic hallucinations. See Hallucinations Hypnosis for bed-wetting, I:455 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 for IBS, III:1867 for kidney stones, III:1918 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for polymyositis, IV:2668 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 Hypnotherapy, III:1728–1731 for alcoholism, I:98 for bulimia, I:613 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 dissociation and, II:1085, 1087 for genital herpes, III:1443 for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 for moking cessation, IV:3106 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2476 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for smoking cessation, IV:3109 for stress reduction, IV:3190 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 Hypnotic Induction Profile, III:2246 Hypnotics and sedatives abuse of, IV:3207, 3209 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:138 antihistamines as, I:276, 277 ARDS from, I:67 aromatherapy as, I:348 for arthroscopy, I:366 for balloon valvuloplasty, I:442 with benzodiazepines, I:469 for calming, IV:2983 for cardiac catheterization, II:656 for catheter ablation, II:680 choking from, II:773 for colonoscopy, II:856 with cross infection, III:1674 with cystometry, II:995 with cystoscopy, II:996 for D & C, II:1076 delirium and, II:1021, 1022 for dizziness, II:1095 for elderly, I:70 with electroencephalography, II:1152 with endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1199 for evoked potential studies, II:1249 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 for insomnia, III:1844 with jaw dislocations, III:2136 with laser surgery, III:1961 for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 in life support, III:2000 with liver biopsy, III:2018 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 for lung biopsy, III:2041 muscle relaxants as, III:2259 myxedema coma from, III:1757 oxygen therapy and, III:1838 respiratory acidosis and, IV:2861 for roseola, IV:2920 for shingles, IV:3032 for skin resurfacing, IV:3080 for sleep disorders, IV:3091 substance abuse and, IV:3206, 3209 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 for tube compression, V:3400 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 withdrawal from, V:3572 with zolpidem, I:284 Hypnotism. See Hypnotherapy GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 from pituitary tumors, IV:2607 after ulcer surgery, V:3428 vegetative state and, V:3488 Hypoglycemic agents. See Antidiabetic drugs Hypogonadism, III:1737–1739, III:1738 anosmia with, IV:3099 sex hormone tests for, IV:3013 Hypokalemia, III:1739–1741 with diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1056 from diuretics, III:2191 from electrolyte disorders, II:1154, 1155 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 vs. hyperkalemia, III:1705 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 mineral supplements for, III:2196 Hypokalemic periodic paralysis, IV:2544–2545 Hypokinesis, III:2222 Hypolipidemia. See Hypolipoproteinemia Hypolipoproteinemia, III:1741–1742 Hypomagnesemia, III:2078–2079 from electrolyte disorders, II:1155 with hypocalcemia, III:2192 hypocalcemia from, III:1731 mineral supplements for, III:2197 neonatal, III:2079 Hypomania, III:2112 in bipolar disorder, I:486 in mood disorders, III:2216 from phototherapy, IV:2591, 2979 Hyponatremia, III:1742–1744 from diuretics, III:2190–2191 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 from hypokalemia, III:1739 mineral supplements for, III:2196 See also Overhydration Hypoparathyroidism, III:1744–1745 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155, 1156 hyperphosphatemia from, IV:2585 hypocalcemia from, III:1731 parathyroid hormone test for, IV:2495 from parathyroidectomy, IV:2498 Hypopharyngeal cancer, III:1515–1519 Hypophosphatemia, II:1155, 1156, IV:2584–2587 Hypophysectomy, III:1745–1746, IV:2607 Hypophysis. See Hypophysectomy Hypopigmentation, II:964, IV:3077, 3078 Hypopituitarism, III:1746–1749 cortisol test for, II:938 FSH test for, II:1350 growth hormone tests for, III:1488 hypogonadism from, III:1738 pituitary dwarfism, IV:2605 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 See also Panhypopituitarism Hypoplastic left heart syndrome, II:899–901 Hypopnea, IV:2668–2669, 3087 Hypoproteinemia immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3310, 3312 Hypoprothrombinemia, II:826, 828, 829 Hyporthyroidism, IV:3036 Hyposmia, IV:3099 Hypospadias, II:813, III:1749–1752, 1750f Hypotension, III:1752–1753 from ACE inhibitors, I:203 from alemtuzumab, I:103 from antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 from antipsychotic drugs, I:301 from aspirin, I:378 from benzodiazepines, I:468 blood transfusions and, V:3367 from chest physical therapy, II:747 from clozapine, I:488 corticotropin levels and, I:65 from cross infection, III:1674 from dehydration, II:1017 from diabetes insipidus, II:1047 dizziness from, II:1095 from flesh-eating disease, II:1337 from heart surgery, III:1544 from hemodialysis, II:1061 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 from leptospirosis, III:1982 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 from meningococcemia, III:2158 from metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 from minoxidil, III:2203 from mushroom poisoning, III:2268 orthostatic (See Orthostatic hypotension) from pentamidine isoethionate, IV:2636 from pituitary tumors, IV:2607 postural (See Orthostatic hypotension) from sedation, IV:2984 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 from sildenafil citrate, IV:3052, 3054 from toxic shock syndrome, V:3346, 3347 from ulcerative colitis, V:3429 from vasodilators, V:3483 from ventricular tachycardia, V:3504 Hypothalamic diseases 3787 Hypothalamic diseases Hypoactive sexual desire disorder, III:2168 Hypobetalipoproteinemia, III:1741 Hypocalcemia, III:1731–1732 from DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1071, 1072 from electrolyte disorders, II:1154–1155 electrolyte tests for, II:1158 with hypomagnesemia, III:2192 mineral supplements for, III:2196 from phosphate toxicity, III:2194 from phosphorus imbalance, IV:2585 Hypochloremia, II:1155 Hypochlorhydria, I:268 Hypochlorous acid, V:3518 Hypochondriacs. See Hypochondriasis Hypochondriasis, III:1732–1733, IV:3115–3116 obsessive-compulsive disorder and, IV:2381 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 from PTSD, IV:2686 vs. somatic delusions, II:1023 Hypochonriacal neurosis. See Hypochondriasis Hypochromic anemia, IV:2838–2839 See also Iron deficiency anemia; Thalassemia Hypoconondria. See Hypochondriasis Hypofibrinogenemia, II:1321 Hypogammaglobulinemia for enteroviruses, II:1213 gammaglobulin with, III:1391 thymoma from, V:3302 Hypoglycemia, III:1734–1737 from antiarrhythmics, I:235 from antidiabetics, I:262 antimalarials and, I:287 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 with beta blockers, I:476 blood glucose tests for, I:529 catecholamines levels with, II:678 from diabetes mellitus, II:1048, 1052 with diabetic foot infections, II:1054 dizziness from, II:1095 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1229 fainting from, II:1280 from fetal growth retardation, III:1852 after gastrectomy, III:1399 vs. generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 from gestational diabetes, III:1447 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 growth hormone tests and, III:1488, 1490 from HRT, III:1673 from insulinoma, IV:2471, 2472 from iron toxicity, III:2194 Hypothalamic diseases hypernatremia from, III:1710 hyponatremia from, III:1742 hypopituitarism from, III:1746 prolactin test and, IV:2723 Hypothalamus with acromegaly, I:32 in corticotropin production, I:65 fever and, II:1313, 1315 FSH test for, II:1350 growth hormone tests for, III:1487 in narcolepsy, IV:2311 in oligomenorrhea, IV:2388–2389 in puberty, IV:2772 in tertiary hypothyroidism, III:1756 Hypothermia, III:1753–1755 vs. cooling treatments, II:915 decompression sickness and, II:1009 from fetal growth retardation, III:1853 from near drowning, IV:2327 wilderness medicine for, V:3562–3563 Hypothyroid goiter. See Goiter Hypothyroid myopathy, III:2294–2295 Hypothyroidism, III:1756–1758 with ACE test, I:206 with aldesleukin, III:1792 alopecia and, I:126 amenorrhea from, I:146 anxiety from, I:318 ascites from, I:372 birth defects from, I:492 from bone marrow transplantation, I:554 with cholesterol tests, II:794 constipation from, II:906 cortisol test for, II:938 creatine kinase test for, II:948 delirium from, II:1020 dementia from, II:1024 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 with goiter, III:1471 high cholesterol and, II:789, 790 hypercholesterolemia from, III:1699 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1707 insulin-like growth factor I for, III:1488 from iodine, III:1725 menorrhagia from, II:1112 with methadone, III:2182 obesity from, IV:2374 with opioid analgesics, I:177 paresthesia from, IV:2365 peripheral neuropathy and, IV:2550, 2552 prolactin test and, IV:2723 RAIU for, V:3314 sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 from sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 3788 thyroid function tests for, V:3309–3312 from thyroidectomy, III:1725 thyroiditis and, V:3318 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 uric acid tests for, V:3442 Hypotonia, II:1099 Hypotonic bladder. See Neurogenic bladder Hypotonic duodenography, III:1758–1760 Hypotonic hyponatremia. See Overhydration Hypotropia. See Strabismus Hypoventilation mechanical ventilation for, III:1839 from sedation, IV:2983, 2984 syndromes, IV:3087 Hypovolemia antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266–267 with ascites, I:372 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 Hypovolemic shock. See Shock Hypoxemia. See Anoxia Hysterectomy, III:1760–1763, 1761 amenorrhea from, I:147 for cervical cancer, II:714 cervical cancer screening and, IV:2517 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1114 for endometrial cancer, II:1190–1191 for endometriosis, II:1194 with estrogen replacement therapy, III:2160 female sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 for hydatidiform mole, III:1685 laparoscopic, III:1947 for menorrhagia, III:2171 vs. myomectomy, III:2292 vs. oophorectomy, IV:2392 for ovarian cancer, IV:2442 for pelvic relaxation, IV:2524 for PID, IV:2523 for postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2681 premature menopause from, IV:2702 with testosterone replacement therapy, III:2162 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 for uterine fibroids, V:3459 Hysteria, III:1764–1765, IV:3113 Hysterical blindness, II:1248 Hysterical disorders. See Hysteria Hysterography. See Hysterosalpingography Hysterosalpingography, III:1765–1766 for DES exposure, II:1040 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 for infertility, III:1828 Hysteroscopy, III:1767–1768, 1767f for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 for endometrial cancer, II:1190 for menstrual disorders, III:2170–2171 with myomectomy, III:2293 for uterine fibroids, III:1761 Hysterosonography, II:1190, III:1768–1769 Hytrin. See Terazosin I IAIM. See International Association of Infant Massage Iansoprazole, for stomach ulcer, V:3434 Iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Iatrogenic Kaposi’s sarcoma. See Kaposi’s sarcoma IBD. See Inflammatory bowel diseases Ibramycin, for leptospirosis, III:1982 IBS. See Irritable bowel syndrome Ibuprofen, IV:2361 for acute mountain sickness, I:133 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:138 aspirin allergy and, I:378 bruises from, I:607 for burns, I:618 for bursitis, I:620 for carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668 for cellulitis, II:685 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:803 for cold sores, II:845 for colposcopy, II:865 for common cold, II:871 for costochondritis, II:940 delirium from, II:1021 for dental trauma, II:1029 for dysmenorrhea, II:1117, III:2171 for endometriosis, II:1194 for fever, II:1315 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for fifth disease, II:1329 for frostbite, II:1372 for gout, III:1477 for hand-foot-mouth disease, III:1507 for headache, III:1524 with hydroxyzine, I:286 with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 for infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Idiopathic primary hematoma/proteinuric syndrome, III:1775–1777 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. See Pulmonary fibrosis Idiopathic scoliosis. See Scoliosis Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, I:76, 422, 423, III:1777–1779 in children, II:828 platelet count for, IV:2625 Idiosyncratic diuretic reaction, IV:2449 Idiosyncratic porphyria. See Porphyria cutanea tarda Idiot savants. See Savant syndrome Idoxuridine, for genital herpes, III:1442 Iduronate-2-sulphatase, III:2229 IED. See Intermittent explosive disorder IFA. See Fluorescent antibody technique Ifosfamide, for testicular cancer, V:3258 Ig heavy chain deletions. See Heavy chain disease IgA deficiency, III:1391, 1785, 1787, 1790 IgA nephropathy. See Idiopathic primary hematoma/proteinuric syndrome IgE receptors in ABPA, I:108 in allergic rhinitis, I:111 in allergies, I:115, 116, 117–118, 122 in anaphylaxis, I:179 IGF-1. See Insulin-like growth factor IgG. See Immunoglobulin G IgG deficiency, III:1790 IgM. See Immunoglobulin M Ignatia, for insomnia, IV:3092 IHV. See Intraventricular hemorrhage Ileal conduit, for unrinary diversion, V:3451 Ileal pouch-anal anastomosis. See Restorative proctocolectomy Ileitis from ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 granulomatous (See Granulomatous ileitis) Ileoanal reservoir procedure. See Restorative proctocolectomy Ileorectal anastomosis, II:1286 Ileostomy, II:1209 with bowel resection, I:563 with Crohn’s disease, II:959 defined, IV:2429 for ulcerative colitis, V:3431 Ileus, III:1779–1780 with Crohn’s disease, II:956 gallstone (See Gallstone ileus) with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 See also Intestinal obstruction GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Iliac crest, for herniated disk grafts, III:1630 Iliac horn disease. See Nail-patella syndrome Illicit drugs. See Street drugs Ilosone. See Erythromycin Ilotycin. See Erythromycin Imagery. See Guided imagery Imaging. See Radionuclide imaging Imdur. See Isosorbide mononitrate Imidazoles, for fungal infections, I:270 Imiglucerase, for Gaucher’s disease, III:2005 Imipenem for anaerobic infections, I:168 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 Imipramine, I:256 with anticonvulsants, I:254, 255 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 for anxiety, I:321 with bronchodilators, I:602 cholestasis from, II:784 with decongestants, II:1012 for depression, I:258, II:1034 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 with MAO inhibitors, II:1102 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for pain, IV:2460, 2463 with zolpidem, I:284 Imipramine hydrochloride, I:455 Imiquimod for anal warts, I:173 for papillomavirus, IV:2542 Imitrex. See Sumatriptan Imitrix. See Sumatriptan Immediate hypersensitivity reactions. See Allergy Immittance testing, I:417 Immobility with bone growth stimulation, I:547 chest physical therapy for, II:745 with contractures, II:913 from conversion disorder, IV:3114 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 edema from, II:1133–1134 hypothermia from, III:1754 in somatoform disorders, IV:3114 therapeutic, III:1780–1782 from traction, V:3357 Immobilization, III:1780–1783, 1781f for bursitis, I:620–621 contractures from, II:913, 914 for dislocations, V:3562 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 exercise after, II:1250 for fingertip injuries, II:1333 for fractures, II:1360, V:3562 of fractures, II:1365 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 for osteoarthritis, IV:2999 3789 Immobilization kidney damage from, IV:2337 with liver biopsy, III:2017 for low back pain, III:2032 for menorrhagia, III:2171 for migraines, III:2188 for mumps, III:2256 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414, 2999 for pain, IV:2459, 2462 for pericarditis, IV:2539 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for pseudoxanthoma elasticum, IV:2754 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, 307, IV:2901 for root canal therapy, IV:2915 for roseola, IV:2920 for sinusitis, IV:3058 for sore throats, IV:3119 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for tendinitis, V:3251 for tension headache, V:3255 with terazosin, I:130–131 for toxoplasmosis, V:3349 ICD. See Contact dermatitis Ice packs, II:915 for edema, III:1782 for erythema nodosum, II:1227 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for infectious arthritis, III:1821 for mallet finger, III:2102 for osteoarthritis, IV:2999 for prostatitis, IV:2741 for rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 for skin resurfacing, IV:3080 for sports injuries, IV:3146 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 for tennis elbow, V:3253 for tooth extraction, V:3333 for torticollis, V:3341 See also Heat/cold application Icelandic hereditary cerebral hemorrhage, II:696 Ichthyosis, III:1771–1773, III:1907 Ictal EEG. See Electroencephalography Icterohemorrhagic fever. See Leptospirosis Icterus. See Jaundice ICU. See Intensive care units IDDM. See Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus Identification (Psychology), III:2244–2245 Identified patient, in family therapy, II:1288 Identity, self help groups for, III:1485 Identity disturbances, II:1086–1087 Immobilization protein components test and, IV:2746 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 Immune abnormalities. See Immunologic diseases Immune cells in autoimmune diseases, I:422–423 for debridement, II:1008 in graft vs. host disease, III:1481 Immune complex test, III:1783–1784 Immune deficiency. See Immunodeficiency Immune disorders. See Immunologic diseases Immune enhancements. See Immune system therapy Immune function tests. See Immunologic tests Immune-related thrombocytopenic purpura. See Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Immune response in Addison’s disease, I:53 to allergens, I:111 in allergic purpura, I:110 in asthma, I:381 with barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 to bone grafts, I:545 to fever, II:1314 in graft vs. host disease, III:1481 immune complex test for, III:1783 immunologic therapy for, III:1791–1795 lichen planus from, III:1997 to liver transplantation, III:2029 to malaria, III:2088 to pain, IV:2459–2460 pityriasis rosea as, IV:2609 in sarcoidosis, IV:2940 in serum sickness, IV:3007 temporal arteritis as, V:3247 vasculitis from, V:3478 Immune serum globulin for chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 for common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 for hepatitis A exposure, III:1597 for immunologic deficiency syndromes, III:1791 for SCID, IV:3010 See also Gammaglobulins Immune system aging and, I:70 in allergies, I:114–115, 122 with anticancer drugs, I:246 in atopic dermatitis, I:403 in autoimmune diseases, I:422–423 with common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1019 3790 DiGeorge’s syndrome and, II:1071, 1072 endometriosis and, II:1193 fever and, II:1314 general adaptation syndrome and, III:1425 guided imagery for, III:1490 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897, 1898 Korean ginseng and, III:1455, 1456 in multiple myeloma, III:2238 in myasthenia gravis, III:2272–2273 RSV and, IV:2868 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3231 therapeutic touch and, V:3282 trypanosoma brucei and, IV:3093–3094 Immune system diseases. See Immunologic diseases Immune system therapy for breast cancer, I:584 cell therapy and, II:686 immune complex test for, III:1783 Immune thrombocytopenic purpura. See Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Immunity to elephantiasis, II:1167 to fifth disease, II:1328 HLA antigens and, III:1680 from vaccines, V:3465 Immunization for arborvirus encephalitis, I:348 for chickenpox, II:749, 752–753 with coagulation disorders, II:829 with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 with DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for diphtheria, II:1077, 1078 encephalitis from, II:1178 ethnic differences in, III:2200, 2201 Guillain-Barré syndrome with, III:1492 for Hepatitis B, I:500, 517 history of, V:3294 for infection control, III:1822 for Japanese encephalitis, III:1880 for measles, III:2138, 2140 for meningitis, III:2157 for mental retardation prevention, III:2176 for mumps, III:2256 paralysis from, IV:2491 for rubella, IV:2928 schedule, II:761–762, 765 with sickle cell anemia, I:183 for SIDS prevention, IV:3215 for tetanus, V:3265–3266 for wilderness travel, V:3563 Immunoblot. See Western blot Immunochemical tests, II:1303 Immunocompromised host with antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 antibiotic prophylaxis for, IV:2726 antiviral drugs for, I:315, 316 aspergillosis in, I:375 with candidiasis, II:646 with cat-scratch disease, II:670 with cellulitis, II:684 with chickenpox, II:750, 751–752 cross infection and, III:1674 with cyclosporiasis, II:981 with cytomegalovirus infections, II:998, 1000 delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1019 diarrhea from, II:1066 E. coli in, II:1235 with enterobacterial infections, II:1204 with erysipelas, II:1226 with fifth disease, II:1328, 1329 flesh-eating disease with, II:1337 food poisoning in, II:1353, 1354 with genital herpes (See Tea tree oil) genital herpes and, III:1443 with giardiasis, III:1451 from heart transplantation, III:1548 infection control for, III:1822 with infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 with interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 with kidney transplantation, III:1922 with laryngitis, III:1957 Legionnaires’ disease and, III:1972 with leishmaniasis, III:1975 with listeriosis, III:2012 lung abscess and, III:2039 lymphomas and, III:2092–2093 with mucormycosis, III:2231 multiple myeloma and, III:2239 with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 with nocardiosis, IV:2358 with non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3066–3067 otitis externa in, IV:2432 pneumococcal pneumonia and, IV:2633 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2635–2636 proctitis with, IV:2718 with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747 pseudomonas infections in, IV:2750 septic shock in, IV:3005, 3006 shingles and, IV:3031 sporotrichosis and, IV:3143 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3156 with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, IV:3160 TB tests and, V:3402 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Immunofluorescence assay. See Fluorescent antibody technique Immunogenic cells, III:1481, 1482 Immunoglobulin A deficiency in (See IgA deficiency) in hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1775–1776 immunoelecrophoresis for, III:1788, 1789 Immunoglobulin deficiency syndromes. See Immunologic deficiency syndromes Immunoglobulin E receptors. See IgE receptors Immunoglobulin electrophoresis. See Immunoelectrophoresis Immunoglobulin G in autoimmune diseases, I:424 deficiency in, III:1790 for erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 immunoelecrophoresis for, III:1788, 1789 in rubella test, IV:2928 Immunoglobulin G antibodies in common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:998 in Epstein-Barr virus test, II:1224 in hepatitis A tests, III:1610, 1612 Immunoglobulin M immunoelecrophoresis for, III:1788, 1789 in rubella test, IV:2928, 2929 with splenectomy, IV:3140 in TORCH tests, V:3339 in Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3543 Immunoglobulin M antibodies from cytomegalovirus infections, II:999 in Epstein-Barr virus test, II:1224 in hepatitis A tests, III:1610, 1611 in hepatitis D tests, III:1611 Immunoglobulin therapy. See Passive immunization Immunoglobulins, III:1391–1392 blood transfusions of, V:3368 with bronchiectasis, I:596 for coagulation disorders, II:829 for Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1493 for Hepatitis B, IV:2542 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788–1789 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 plasma cells and, III:2238 X-linked agammaglobulinemia and, V:3585 See also Gammaglobulins; Passive immunization Immunohistochemistry, IV:2943 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Immunologic deficiency syndromes, III:1789–1791 See also specific disorders Immunologic diseases, III:1784–1787 with anticancer agents, I:248 in ataxia-telangiectasia, I:388 with bronchiectasis, I:596 carbuncle with, I:536 chronic granulomatous disease as, II:805 with colony stimulating factors, II:643 common variable immunodeficiency, II:872–873 Crohn’s disease with, II:956, 957 cryptococcosis with, II:964 drug-induced hepatitis as, III:1607 furunculosis with, I:536 with hemophilus infections, III:1586 with immunotherapy, III:1792 jaundice from, III:1883 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 polio and, IV:2648 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 psoriasis as, IV:2756 from rubella, V:3339 sudden infant death syndrome and, IV:3214 See also specific diseases Immunologic tests for head and neck cancer, III:1516 for immunologic diseases, III:1786 for meningitis, III:2156 for scrub typhus, IV:2976 See also Immune complex test Immunologic therapies. See Immunotherapy Immunological deficiency. See Immunodeficiency Immunomagnetic separation, II:1236, 1237 Immunometric assay, for allergies, I:118 Immunosuppression immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1789 immunotherapy for, III:1791 Immunosuppressive agents, III:1795–1799 acute leukemia from, III:1987 atopic dermatitis from, I:404 for autoimmune diseases, I:424 beta2-microglobulin test for, I:473 blastomycosis with, I:513 bone grafts and, I:545 with candidiasis, II:646 for celiac disease, II:683 for cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 coccidioidomycosis with, II:836 for Crohn’s disease, II:958, 959 3791 Immunosuppressive agents with toxoplasmosis, V:3349 Tzanck preparation for, V:3424 with urethritis, V:3441 with vibriosis, V:3506 Immunocompromised patients. See Immunocompromised host Immunodeficiency, III:1784–1788 in AIDS, I:75–76 in ataxia-telangiectasia, I:388 bacteremia and, I:435 with barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 bone marrow transplantation for, I:550 with bursitis, I:620 with candidiasis, II:646 with cellulitis, II:684 chronic fatigue syndrome and, II:802 coccidioidomycosis with, II:834 common variable (See Common variable immunodeficiency) from complement deficiencies, II:873–875 cryptosporidiosis with (See Paromomycin) with cyclosporiasis, II:981 with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 from diarrhea, II:1066 gammaglobulin for, III:1391 in general adaptation syndrome, III:1425 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 from graft vs. host disease, III:1481, 1482 histoplasmosis with, III:1639–1641 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 with keratitis, III:1904 from malnutrition, III:2104 with meningococcemia, III:2157 MMR vaccine with, III:2256 with nocardiosis, IV:2358 with sepsis, IV:3004 vulvar cancer from, V:3536 from Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 See also Immunologic diseases Immunodeficiency diseases. See Immunologic diseases Immunodiagnostic tests. See Immunologic tests Immunoelectrophoresis, III:1788–1789 in Bence Jones protein test, I:464 after protein components test, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis and, IV:2747 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3545 for X-linked agammaglobulinemia, V:3585 for XLA, V:3585 Immunofixation, III:1788 Immunosuppressive agents cryptococcosis with, II:964 with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 for eyelid edema, II:1272 with fifth disease, II:1329 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for graft vs. host disease, III:1481 for heart transplantation, III:1547, 1548 for hemolytic anemia, III:1831 hemolytic uremic syndrome from, III:1580 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 for kidney transplantation, II:808, III:1921–1922 for liver transplantation, III:2029–2030 for lung transplantation, III:2055 with lymphomas, III:2093 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 non-melanoma skin cancer with, IV:3066–3067 for pancreatic transplantation, IV:2467 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 for polymyositis, IV:2667, 2668 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2855 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, IV:2901 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 Immunotherapy, III:1791–1795 for acute leukemia, III:1989 for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:121, 122 for asthma, I:382–383 for bladder cancer, I:508 for cancer, II:635, 639, 640, 641 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502–1503 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647–1648 for kidney cancer, III:1910–1911 for melanoma, III:2098 for multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2476 for penile cancer, IV:2530 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3546 Imodium. See Loperamide Imodium A-D. See Loperamide Imodium-AD. See Loperamide Impacted feces. See Fecal impaction Impacted tooth, III:1799–1800, V:3332 Impatiens. See Jewelweed Impedance phlebography, III:1800–1801 3792 Impedance plethysmography, II:1013 Impetigo, III:1801–1802 vs. cold sores, II:845 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 pustule from, IV:3074 Impingement syndrome, I:362 Implantable contraceptives. See Norplant Implantable defibrillators, III:1802–1804, 1803 for arrhythmias, I:353 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:408 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 myocardial resection after, III:2288 for sudden cardiac death prevention, IV:3212 for ventricular fibrillation, V:3500 for ventricular tachycardia, V:3504 Implantation (Ovum), III:1876 Implants, for contraception, II:1032 Implosive therapy, for phobias, IV:2583 Impotence, III:1804–1807, IV:3017 from aneurysmectomy, I:193 from beta blockers, I:476 blood-viscosity reducing agents for, I:520 from cystectomy, II:983–984 drugs for, priapism from, IV:2715 with galactorrhea, III:1375 Korean ginseng for, III:1455 from liver cirrhosis, II:814 from minoxidil, III:2203 penile prosthesis for, IV:2531–2532 from Peyronie’s disease, IV:2572 physical vs. psychological, III:2167 from priapism, IV:2715 from prostatectomy, IV:2733, 2739 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 sildenafil citrate for, IV:3051–3055 from smoking, IV:3104 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3130, 3132 from transurethral prostate resection, II:1203 See also Infertility Impulse control disorders, III:1807–1808, III:1845 Impulsive behaviors, I:481 IMRs. See Infant mortality rates Imuran. See Azathioprine In-phase biopsy, II:1187 In-the-canal hearing aids, III:1525 In-the-ear hearing aids, III:1525 In-transit metastasis, III:2096 In vitro fertilization. See Fertilization in vitro Inactivated polio vaccine. See Salk vaccine Inborn error of metabolism, II:990, III:1376–1379 Incarcerated hernia. See Hernia Incentive spirometry, III:1837–1841 Incision and drainage for Bartholin’s gland cyst, I:449, 450 for clenched fist injury, II:821 Incisional biopsy, II:639 breast, I:575 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 for sarcomas, IV:2943 for tumor removal, V:3417 See also Biopsy Incisional hernia, III:1623 from bowel resection, I:564 from pyloroplasty, IV:2792 surgery for, III:1626 Inclusion conjunctivitis, III:1810–1811 Incompetent cervix, III:1811–1812 from cervical conization, II:718 prematurity from, IV:2706 recurrent miscarriage and, IV:2836, 2837 Incomplete abortion, I:7, 10, 12 Incomplete fractures. See Fractures Incomplete miscarriage. See Miscarriage Incontinence with Alzheimer’s disease, I:139 from benign prostatic hyperplasia, IV:2737 biofeedback for, I:482–483 bowel training for, I:565 cystoscopy for, II:996 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 from dementia, II:1025 devices for bladder control, I:511 vs. diarrhea, II:1065 electromyography for, II:1255 fecal (See Fecal incontinence) gangrene from, III:1393 in multiple sclerosis, III:2253 from prostate cancer treatment, IV:2733 from prostatectomy, IV:2739 stress urinary (See Stress urinary incontinence) urinary (See Urinary incontinence) Incontinence aids, III:2123 Incontinence rash, I:245 Increased intracranial pressure. See Intracranial hypertension Incubators, for premature infants, III:2249, IV:2707 Incus in ear surgery, II:1123 in stapedectomy, IV:3154 Indapamide, for hypertension, I:279–281 Independence, in anorexia nervosa, I:212 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 kidney damage from, IV:2337 nail removal for, IV:2309 paresthesia from, IV:2365, 2366 See also Chemicals Industrial pollution COPD and, II:809 extrinsic allergic alveolitis from, III:1717 Hamilton, Alice and, IV:2387 heavy metal poisoning from, III:1560–1561 jaundice from, III:1882 lung diseases from, III:2050 mineral toxicity from, III:2194 pulmonary fibrosis from, III:1774, 1775 Industrial safety for anthrax prevention, I:225 anxiety and, I:319 for cancer prevention, II:633, 637 contact dermititis and, II:908, 909 eye examination and, II:1262 Indwelling catheters, V:3451 cross infection from, III:1674 endocarditis from, II:1183 with epididymitis, II:1219 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2347–2348 after transurethral bladder resection, V:3375 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Inert gas narcosis, II:1009, IV:2356–2357 Infalyte. See Oral rehydration solutions Infant botulism, I:560, 561, 562, II:1355 Infant Botulism Treatment and Prevention Program, I:561 Infant food with breastfeeding, III:1942 fructose intolerance from, III:1621 Infant formula for colic, II:847 for dehydration, II:1018 fructose intolerance from, III:1621 iron supplementation of, III:2196 mineral supplements in, III:2196 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 with neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 with overhydration, IV:2449 Infant massage, III:1817–1819 Infant mortality rates, III:2199, 2201 Infant respiratory distress syndrome. See Respiratory distress syndrome Infantile agranulocytosis. See Neutropenia Infantile beriberi, I:469, 470 Infantile diarrhea, II:1066 See also Rotaviruses Infantile eczema. See Atopic dermatitis Infantile gastroenteritis, II:1235, 1236 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Infantile lobar emphysema. See Congenital lobar emphysema Infantile paralysis. See Poliomyelitis Infantile Refsum disease, IV:2560 Infantile scoliosis. See Scoliosis Infants beriberi in, I:469, 470 botulism in (See Infant botulism) chickenpox in, II:750 congenital adrenal hyperplasia in, II:885 CPR for, II:662, II:663, II:664 dehydration and, II:1017, 1018 diarrhea in (See Infantile diarrhea) drug metabolism in, II:1102 E. coli infections in, II:1235 fluoroquinolones and, II:1345 food poisoning in, II:1353 with fructose intolerance, III:1621 glaucoma in, III:1458 gonorrhea in, III:1472 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1565 intestinal obstruction in, III:1848 iron deficiency anemia in, III:1862 newborn (See Newborn infants) oral care for, IV:2405 osteopetroses in, IV:2423–2424 otitis media in, IV:2433 with overhydration, IV:2448–2449 postpartum depression and care of, IV:2681 premature (See Prematurity) rashes of, IV:2821 rectal prolapse in, IV:2835, 2836 scurvy in, IV:2978 TEF in, V:3351, 3352 vitamin A deficiency in, V:3512 vitamin D deficiency in, V:3515, 3517 vitamin toxicity in, V:3522, 3524 Infarct avid imaging. See Technetium heart scan Infection aldolase and, I:100 after amniocentesis, I:156 from amputation, I:159 anaerobic (See Anaerobic infections) from aneurysmectomy, I:193 from animal bites (See Animal bite infections) with anticancer drugs, I:247 with antimigraine agents, I:290 from atopic dermatitis, I:405 bacterial (See Bacterial infections) blood transfusions for, V:3368 bone marrow transplantation from, I:550 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 from bronchiectasis, I:596 from burns, I:618 bursitis from, I:620 3793 Infection Independent living, with mental retardation, III:2175 Inderal. See Propranolol Index of refraction, II:1266 India ink test, II:965 Indian chickweed. See Chickweed Indian elm. See Slippery elm Indian hemp. See Marijuana Indian parsley. See Osha Indian plant. See Goldenseal Indian tobacco. See Lobelia Indigestion, III:1812–1815 antacids for, I:217 from histamine, III:2132 Indigo, for sinusitis, IV:3059 Indinavir for AIDS, I:80 as protease inhibitors, IV:2742 for retrovirus diseases, I:303 with St. John’s wort, II:1103 Indirect DNA testing, III:1434 Indium scan of the body, III:1815–1816 Indocin. See Indomethacin Indolones, for psychosis, I:301 Indomethacin alanine aminotransferase levels from, III:2024 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 aspirin allergy and, I:378 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for gout, I:282, III:1477 with gout drugs, III:1480 for histiocytosis, III:1639 with lipase test, III:2002 as migraine trigger, III:2188 for pleurisy, IV:2632 for polyhydramnios, IV:2664 for prematurity, IV:2707 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 Induced abortion, IV:2522 Induced coma, I:443–444 Induced labor, II:756, III:1816–1817 for abortion, I:11 drugs for, II:1108–1109 electronic fetal monitoring, II:1161 neonatal jaundice from, III:1883 for premature membrane rupture, IV:2704–2705 for stillbirth, IV:3163 Induction therapy for acute leukemia, III:1988 for cluster headache, II:825 Indurative mastopathy. See Fibrocystic condition of the breast Industrial accidents, V:3377 Industrial bronchitis, COPD and, II:809 Industrial chemicals aplastic anemia from, I:182 bladder cancer and, I:507 Hamilton, Alice and, IV:2387 Infection central nervous system (See Central nervous system infections) with chemotherapy, II:742 from chest drainage therapy, II:744 with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 vs. colic, II:847 from congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 corticotropin levels and, I:65 cytomegalovirus (See Cytomegalovirus infections) from D & C, II:1076 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 dental, IV:2407 from dialysis, II:1061 from diverticulum, II:888 ear (See Ear infection) electrolyte imbalance from, II:1157 enterobacterial, II:1204–1207 after episiotomy, II:1223 ESR and, II:1231 from exstrophy, II:888 eye (See Eye infections) fever and, II:1314, 1316 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 folic acid deficiency anemia and, II:1349 from foot care neglect, II:1357 from foreign objects, II:1358 with fractures, II:1361, 1362 fungal (See Mycoses) FUO and, II:1317 G6PD from, III:1464 gallium scan for, III:1383, 1384 from gastrostomy, III:1411 with hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 hearing disorders from, II:839, III:1528 hemolytic anemia from, III:1579 herpesviridae (See Herpesviridae infections) in high-risk pregnancy, III:1632–1633 HIV (See HIV infections) immunologic deficiency syndromes and, III:1791 immunologic diseases and, III:1786, 1787 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1793 impacted tooth and, III:1799, 1800 indium scan for, III:1815 joint (See Joint infections) from laser surgery, III:1961, 1963 with leeches, III:1971 vs. leukemia, III:1985 leukocytosis from, III:1993 from life support, III:2001 liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 from liver transplantation, III:2030 after lung transplantation, III:2055 from lymphedema, III:2067 3794 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 miscarriage from, III:2204, IV:2837 in motion sickness, III:2219 with mouth injuries, III:2137 in Munchausen syndrome, III:2257 from mycetoma, III:2275 nail removal for, IV:2309 neuralgia from, IV:2339 opportunistic (See Opportunistic infections) osteomyelitis from, IV:2419 from pacemaker implantation, IV:2454 pericarditis from, IV:2536 perinatal, IV:2540–2543 with periodic paralysis, IV:2544 from phlebotomy, IV:2580 from piercing and tattoos, IV:2599 pleural biopsy for, IV:2627 prematurity and, IV:2708 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 psoriasis from, IV:2756 with pulmonary artery catheterization, IV:2777 after radial keratotomy, IV:2805 recurrent miscarriage from, IV:2837 from ruptured appendix, I:338 from salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 with SCID, IV:3010 from sex change surgery, IV:3011 skin (See Infectious skin diseases) stool culture and, IV:3171 streptococcal (See Streptococcal infections) from stress, III:1425 from surgery, III:1427 from thoracentesis, V:3285 from thoracic surgery, V:3289 tooth extraction and, V:3332, 3334 toothache and, V:3336 topical antibiotics for, I:244–245 from trabeculectomy, V:3351 from traction, V:3358 from transhepatic biliary catheterization, V:3370 from traumatic amputations, V:3378 WBC count and differential for, V:3556 from wounds, III:1937 from X-linked agammaglobulinemia, V:3585–3586 Infection control, III:1821–1823, 1822t for cross infection, III:1676 for immunologic diseases, III:1787 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 Infectious arthritis, III:1819–1821 from animal bite infections, I:207 from clenched fist injury, II:820 from hemophilus infections, III:1586, 1587 from impetigo, III:1802 Infectious bone diseases fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 from fractures, II:1365 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2013 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 from smallpox, IV:3096 Infectious diarrhea. See Food poisoning Infectious-disease antibody titer tests, V:3338 Infectious diseases. See Communicable diseases Infectious Diseases Society of America, II:752–753 Infectious hepatitis. See Hepatitis A Infectious mononucleosis, III:1823–1825 adenoid hyperplasia from, I:55 alkaline phosphatase and, I:107 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 with cold antibody hemolytic anemia, I:181 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 vs. cytomegalovirus infections, II:998, V:3339 from Epstein-Barr virus, II:1224 vs. fifth disease, II:1329 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 jaundice from, IV:2330 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1942 liver function tests for, III:2025, 2027 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 vs. paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 with penicillins, IV:2528 sore throat from, IV:3118 streptococcal infections and, V:3327 vs. syphilis, IV:3021 WBC count and differential for, V:3557 Infectious polyneuritis. See GuillainBarré syndrome Infectious skin diseases antifungals for, I:270–271 biopsy for, IV:3065 culture for, IV:3068–3069 endocarditis from, II:1183 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 from lice, III:1994–1996 from melioidosis, III:2150 with mycobacterial infections, III:2276–2277 penicillin for, IV:2527 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 rash from, IV:2820 streptococcal antibody tests for, IV:3180 with XLA, V:3585 Infective endocarditis GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from vasectomy, V:3481–3482 Infertility drugs, III:1829–1831 ascites from, I:371 luteinizing hormone test and, III:2056 multiple pregnancy from, III:2247, 2248 with oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 selective abortion with, I:8 Infertility therapies, III:1831–1833 Infibulation, II:1306–1307 Inflammation with abscesses, I:13, 14 with adenovirus infections, I:56–57 in allergic rhinitis, I:112 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:136 with anosmia, I:215 aortic valve insufficiency from, I:328 aspirin for, I:378 from atopic dermatitis, I:403 from autoimmune diseases, I:424 in bursitis, I:620 from carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668 with colony stimulating factors, II:643 in dementia, II:1025 from dermatitis, II:1037 EGD for, II:1246 ESR and, II:1231 eye, glaucoma from, III:1458 with fibromyalgia, II:1326–1327 of gallbladder, III:1379 gallium scan for, III:1383, 1384 from gonorrhea, III:1472, 1473 gout from, III:1476 from herniated disk, III:1628 intestinal (See Intestinal inflammation) of joints, I:362 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 macular degeneration from, III:2075 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 from mycetoma, III:2275 neuralgia from, IV:2339 neutrophilia from, III:1993 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 from orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 paresthesia from, IV:2365 of penis, I:439–440, II:812, 813 from PID, IV:2521 from pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854–2855 from rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, IV:2899–2902 skin (See Contact dermatitis) from sports injuries, IV:3146 from sunburn, IV:3218 from syphilis, IV:3227 from vasculitis, V:3478 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 Inflammatory bowel diseases vs. amebiasis, I:144 with antacids, I:218 bowel resection for, I:563–565 carcinoembryonic antigen levels in, II:654 colostomy for, II:861 Crohn’s disease as, II:956–959 diarrhea from, II:1066 dysmenorrhea from, III:2170 endocarditis from, II:1183 erythema nodosum, II:1227 FOBT for, II:1302 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 intestinal obstruction from, III:1848 proctitis from, IV:2719 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2743 rectal polyps from, IV:2834 sigmoidoscopy for, I:562, IV:3049–3051 sitz bath for, IV:3061 ulcerative colitis as, V:3429–3431 See also Celiac disease; Crohn’s disease Inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy. See Guillain-Barré syndrome Inflammatory disease barium enema for, I:447 bowel (See Inflammatory bowel diseases) ESR and, II:1231 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 periodontal diseases as, IV:2545 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747 urinalysis for, V:3446 See also Familial Mediterranean fever Inflammatory myopathy, II:1160 Infliximab for Crohn’s disease, II:958–959 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Influenza, III:1833–1837, 1835 antiviral drugs for, I:315–317 aspirin for, I:378 with bismuth subsalicylate, I:265 bronchiectasis from, I:596 vs. common cold, II:870 COPD and, II:810 cough from, II:941 cough suppressants for, II:943 croup from, II:960 dizziness from, II:1095 facial paralysis and, I:461 vs. gastroenteritis, III:1408 vs. hepatitis A, III:1596 vs. hepatitis B, III:1600 labyrinthitis from, III:1935–1936 3795 Influenza heart valve diseases from, V:3473–3474 from transesophageal echocardiography, V:3365 Inferior vena cava, II:1014 Infertility, III:1825–1829, 1826, 1827f from amenorrhea, I:147 from anticancer drugs, I:247 with antirheumatic drugs, I:306 blood-viscosity reducing agents for, I:520 from bone marrow suppression, II:640 from bone marrow transplantation, I:554 from celiac disease, II:682 from chemotherapy, III:1647 from chlamydial pneumoniae, IV:2540 from cystectomy, II:983 cystic fibrosis and, II:984–985, 987–988 from DES exposure, II:1039, 1040 from Down syndrome, II:1100 endometrial biopsy for, II:1186 endometrial cancer and, II:1189 endometriosis and, II:1193 from epididymitis, II:1219 from female genital mutilation, II:1307 from folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 FSH test for, II:1350 with galactorrhea, III:1375 HSG for, III:1765 hysteroscopy for, III:1767 laparoscopy for, III:1947 luteinizing hormone test for, III:2056–2057 from lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071 male, III:2167–2168 from myomectomy, III:2292 from nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 from obesity, IV:2373, 2374 with oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 from PID, IV:2521, 2524 from premature menopause, IV:2702 prostate ultrasound and, IV:2736 semen analysis for, IV:2994–2996 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012, 3013 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 from STDs, III:1472, 1473–1474, IV:3020 with testicular cancer, V:3258 tests for, IV:2713 therapeutic touch for, V:3282 from tubal ligation, V:3397 ultrasonography for, IV:2975 from undescended testes, V:3437 from uterine fibroids, V:3458 Influenza laryngitis from, III:1957 vs. leptospirosis, III:1981 vs. malaria, III:2090 vs. meningococcemia, III:2157 multiple sclerosis with, III:2252 myocarditis from, III:2289 vs. parrot fever, IV:2506 with penicillins, IV:2528 pericarditis from, IV:2538 Reye’s syndrome after, IV:2895 sore throat from, IV:3117 stillbirth from, IV:3163 vaccination for, V:3465 in women, V:3576 Influenza vaccination for emphysema, II:1174 for epiglottitis, II:1221 hives from, III:1642 with interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 mortality rates and, III:2201 with multiple sclerosis, III:2253 with silicosis, IV:3056 thyroiditis and, V:3320 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 Influenza vaccine, III:1836–1837 with asbestosis, I:371 for complement deficiencies, II:874 Salk, Jonas E. and, IV:2649 Influenzal meningitis. See Meningitis Informed consent for AIDS tests, I:82 for autopsy, I:426 with breast reconstruction, I:589 for CAT scan, II:875 for psychological testing, IV:2764 Infranodal A-V block, I:614 Infrared light, conjunctivitis from, II:903 Infraspinatus, IV:2920 Infratentorial brain tumors. See Brain tumors Ingham, Eunice D., IV:2842 Inguinal canal, III:1626 Inguinal hernia. See Hernia INH. See Isoniazid Inhalants abuse of, IV:3207, 3209 delirium from, II:1021 substance abuse and, IV:3207, 3209 Inhalation anthrax. See Pulmonary anthrax Inhalation tests, for allergies, I:124 Inhalation therapies, III:1837–1841 aromatherapy, I:349–350 for newborns, III:1838, 1839, 1840, 1841 with respiratory function tests, IV:2784 for silicosis, IV:3055 for sore throats, IV:3119 See also Mechanical ventilation 3796 Inherited diseases. See Hereditary diseases Injectable contraceptives, II:1031–1032 Injection therapy, for impotence, III:1806 Injuries from accidental falls, IV:2996–2997 acute kidney failure from, I:44 airway obstruction by, III:1999 amputation for, I:157, 158 anaerobic infections from, I:167 anesthesia for, I:191 from animal bites, I:206–208, 497–504 antibiotics for, I:245 anticoagulants and, I:251 ARDS from, I:67 arrhythmia from, II:679 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 athletic (See Sports injuries) from battered child syndrome, I:452, 453 blood transfusions for, V:3368 brain (See Brain injuries) bursitis from, I:620 with cellulitis, II:684 in children, II:765t cholestasis from, II:785 coccyx (See Coccyx, injuries to) corticotropin levels and, I:65 from CPR, II:664–665 crush (See Crush injuries) cultures for, V:3578 dental (See Dental trauma) with diabetic neuropathies, II:1057 esophageal cancer and, II:1240 exercise and, II:1250, 1251 fasciotomy for, II:1291 fingertip (See Fingertip injuries) flesh-eating disease from, II:1336, 1337 flushing of, V:3580 foot care with, II:1357 gangrene from, III:1393–1394 gas embolism from, II:1169, III:1396 hair transplantation for, III:1499 head (See Head injuries) hearing disorders from, II:838 from Heimlich maneuver, III:1565 hemoptysis from, III:1589 herniated disk from, III:1628 hydrocele from, III:1686 hyperkalemia from, III:2194 hypotension from, III:1752, 1753 hypothermia from, III:1754 with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 jaundice from, III:1883 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1940, 1941 laser surgery for, III:1960 leeches for, III:1970 local anesthesia for, I:191 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 malnutrition from, III:2104 maxillofacial, III:2135–2138, 2136 with melioidosis, III:2150 mental retardation from, III:2174 movement disorders from, III:2221 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2260 mycetoma from, III:2275 with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 myoglobin levels and, III:2292 nail removal for, IV:2309 neurologic examination for, IV:2352–2353 neutrophilia from, III:1993 nocardiosis from, IV:2358 nose (See Nasal trauma) nosebleed from, IV:2364 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 occupational (See Occupational injuries) optic atrophy from, IV:2399 orthopedic surgery for, IV:2410 osteoarthritis from, IV:2412 osteochondrosis from, IV:2416 osteomyelitis from, IV:2419 pain from, IV:2460 paralysis from, IV:2491 paresthesia from, IV:2365 pelvic (See Pelvic injuries) peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552, 2554 peritonitis from, IV:2556 physical allergy from, IV:2591–2592 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 pleurisy from, IV:2631 prolactin test and, IV:2724 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2744 psoriasis from, IV:2756 psychosis with, IV:2766 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 from rape and sexual assault, IV:2817 reflexology for, IV:2842 sacroiliac disease from, IV:2931 with sarcomas, IV:2942 short term psychosis with, IV:2766 skin ulcer from, IV:3075 spinal instrumentation for, IV:3133 spleen (See Splenic trauma) sports (See Sports injuries) staphylococcal infections from, IV:3158 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with antiretroviral drugs, I:303 barbiturates for, I:445 benzodiazepines for, I:466 caffeine and, II:625 central nervous system depressants for, II:688 from dementia, II:1025 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 drugs for (See Anti-insomnia agents) in elderly, IV:2997, 3000 from emphysema, II:1173 from hyperthyroidism, III:1724 from hypoglycemia, III:1735 lavender for, I:349 from menopause, III:2159 from mental disorders, IV:3089 from mood disorders, III:2216 from phototherapy, IV:2979 phototherapy and, IV:2590 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 See also Sleep disorders Instant strep test. See Rapid strep test Institute of Epidemiological Research, V:3541 Institute of Medicine, IV:2846 Insulin acidosis from, III:2179, 2180 anaphylaxis from, I:179 with beta blockers, I:477 in blood glucose levels, I:528–529 with cystoscopy, II:996 deficiency, II:1055, 1056 dependence, IV:2467 diabetes mellitus and, I:262, II:1047–1048, 1049, 1051–1052, IV:2612 gallstones from, III:1388 gestational diabetes and, III:1447, 1448 in glucose production, III:1734 with growth hormone tests, III:1488 for hyperkalemia, III:1706 hypoglycemia due to, I:262 for hypothermia, III:1755 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 pancreatic transplantation for, IV:2467 for pancreatitis, IV:2481 for periodic paralysis, IV:2545 protein components test and, IV:2745 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, I:422, 424–425 from celiac disease, II:682 in children, II:762 chronic kidney failure from, II:806 with hypoglycemia, III:1734, 1735–1736 ketoacidosis and, II:1055 pancreatic transplantation with, IV:2467 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 Insulin glargine, I:262 Insulin-induced hypoglycemia test for growth hormone deficiency, III:1748 for panhypopituitarism, III:1748 Insulin-like growth factor, I:32–33 Insulin-like growth factor-1, III:1487–1488, 1490, 1748, IV:2604 Insulin-like growth substances, IV:2604–2606 Insulin pumps, for hypoglycemia, III:1736 Insulin reaction. See Hypoglycemia Insulin resistance in gestational diabetes, III:1447 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 in PCOS, IV:2654 Insulin shock. See Hypoglycemia Insulinoma, IV:2471–2472 Insurance benefits for gays and lesbians, III:1415 for malingering, III:2100 Intact dilation and extraction. See Partial birth abortion Integral yoga, III:1514 Integrilin. See Eptifibatide Intelligence in conduct disorder, II:883 decreased, from measles, III:2140 vs. dyslexia, II:1114 learning disorders and, III:1969 with mental retardation, III:2172–2173 in muscular dystrophy, III:2262 Intelligence tests, IV:2764 for dyslexia, II:1116 with mental retardation, III:2175 mental status examination, III:2176–2178 in mental status examination, IV:2351 Stanford-Binet, IV:3153 Wechsler intelligence test, V:3551–3552 Intensive care units for homeostasis monitoring, III:2000 neonatal, IV:2708 for Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 for toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3345 See also Emergency treatment Intention tremor, V:3381 Intercourse, sexual. See Sexual intercourse beta Interferon, III:2252–2253 Interferon-alpha for Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502–1503, 1792 3797 Interferon-alpha thrombophlebitis from, V:3300 topical antibiotics for, I:245 treatment of, I:244, 245 urinalysis for, V:3445 WBC count and differential for, V:3557 See also Wounds Inner ear. See Labyrinth Innocent heart murmur. See Heart murmurs Inocor. See Amrinone lactate Inositol-bound. See Inositol hexanicotinate Inositol hexanicotinate, III:1708 Insect bites choking from, II:772 itching from, III:1874 keloids from, III:1903 local anesthesia for, I:190 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 orbital and periorbital cellulitis from, IV:2407 ozone therapy after, IV:2451 staphylococcal infections from, IV:3158 vesicles from, IV:3074 Insect repellent plague and, IV:2615 for RMSF prevention, IV:2911 Insecticide poisoning, III:1841–1843 Insecticides aplastic anemia from, I:337 citronella, I:350 delirium from, II:1021, 1022 for elephantiasis prevention, II:1167–1168 for malaria prevention, III:2091 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2260 for relapsing fever prevention, IV:2853 for trench fever prevention, V:3384 Insects arbovirus encephalitis from, I:347, 348 asthma from, III:2050 bites of (See Insect bites) filariasis from, III:2067 hemorrhagic fevers from, III:1590, 1591, 1592 hives from, III:1642 occupational asthma from, IV:2386 trachoma from, V:3355, 3356 zoonosis and, V:3599 Inside MS, III:2253 Insight assessment, IV:2351 Insight-oriented analysis. See Psychoanalysis Insoluble fiber, IV:2367 Insomnia, III:1843–1845 from alcoholism, IV:3088–3089 from antiarrhythmics, I:233 with antidepressants, I:257 Interferon-alpha for hepatitis C, III:1604 with hepatitis D, III:1606 in immunotherapy, III:1792 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for macular degeneration, III:2077 for melanoma, III:2099 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for myelofibrosis, III:2282–2283 for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 Interferon alpha 2a for anal warts, I:173 for angiomas, I:495, 496 Interferon alpha 2b, I:173 Interferon gamma 1-b therapy, IV:2424 Interferons for anal warts, I:173 for brain tumors, I:573 for cancer, II:636 for chronic hepatitis, I:373 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 for genital warts, III:1445 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647–1648 in immunotherapy, III:1791–1792, 1793–1795 for kidney cancer, III:1910–1911 for MALT lymphomas, III:2109 for rhinitis, IV:2903 Interleukin for brain tumors, I:573 for cancer, II:636 Interleukin-2 in AIDS, I:82 for kidney cancer, III:1910–1911 Interleukin-6, III:1898 Intermediate-density lipoprotein in cholesterol tests, II:792 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706 Intermittent acute porphyria. See Acute intermittent porphyria Intermittent catheterization for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2347 in spinal cord injuries, IV:3132 Intermittent claudication, I:519 Intermittent explosive disorder, III:1807–1808, III:1845–1846 Intermittent peritoneal dialysis. See Peritoneal dialysis Intermittent pneumatic compression for deep vein thrombosis, II:1014 embolism and, II:1171 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 Intermittent urinary catheterization, V:3455 Internal fetal monitoring. See Electronic fetal monitoring Internal fixation, for fractures, II:1365 Internal hemorrhoids. See Hemorrhoids 3798 Internal radiation. See Brachytherapy Internal radiation therapy. See Brachytherapy Internal State Scale, for bipolar disorder, I:486 International Association of Infant Massage, III:1818 International Consensus Conference, II:976 International Federation of Gynecologists and Obstetricians, II:1190 International Institute of Reflexology, IV:2842 International Prognostic Scoring System for MDS, III:2279, 2280 Internuclear ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 Interpersonal psychotherapy. See Psychotherapy Interpersonal relationships group therapy for, III:1484–1485 in hysteria, III:1764 Interposed abdominal counterpulsation. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Interpositional reconstruction. See Arthroplasty Interpretations, in psychoanalysis, IV:2762 Intersex states. See Hermaphroditism Interstitial chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Interstitial fibrosis, I:57 Interstitial keratitis. See Keratitis Interstitial lung diseases, II:749, III:1773–1775 Interstitial pregnancy, III:1876 Interstitial radiation. See Brachytherapy Interstitial radiotherapy. See Brachytherapy Intertrigo, from diaper rash, II:1062 Intervention, for battered child syndrome, I:453 Interventional radiography, for TEF, V:3352 Intervertebral disk chemolysis. See Chemonucleolysis Intervertebral disk disease. See Cervical disk disease Intervertebral disk displacement. See Herniated disk Intervertebral disks aging of, II:720 in chemonucleolysis, II:738–739 degeneration of, IV:2971 herniated (See Herniated disk) removal of, II:1081–1082 sciatica from, IV:2963 in spinal stenosis, IV:3136 Intestinal abscess from Crohn’s disease, II:957, 958, 959 from diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 Intestinal amebiasis. See Amebiasis Intestinal anthrax, I:224 Intestinal biopsy with colonoscopy, II:857 for Crohn’s disease, II:958 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 with sigmoidoscopy, I:562, 563 for ulcerative colitis, V:3430 Intestinal blockage. See Intestinal obstruction Intestinal cancer bowel resection for, I:563–565 brain tumor with, I:574 carcinoid tumors and, IV:2343 Crohn’s disease and, II:957 intestinal polyps and, III:1850 See also Colon cancer Intestinal diseases activated charcoal for, I:368, II:731 antimalarials and, I:287 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 balantidiasis from, I:441 cancer (See Intestinal cancer) from carbohydrate intolerance, II:649 with cephalosporins, II:694 with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 gallstones from, III:1388 from geophagia, IV:2596 giardiasis as, III:1450 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 magnesium poisoning from, III:2079 with measles, III:2139 from mushroom poisoning, III:2268 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with penicillins, IV:2528 from peritonitis, IV:2489 tumors, III:1898 Intestinal fistula from appendicitis, I:340 from Crohn’s disease, II:957, 958 Intestinal flu. See Gastroenteritis Intestinal gangrene, III:1856 Intestinal gas colic from, II:847 from colonoscopy, II:858 drugs for, I:271 Intestinal inflammation from antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 from Crohn’s disease, II:956 from food poisoning, II:1353 Intestinal obstruction, III:1848–1850 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 with anticancer agents, I:248 antihistamines and, I:278 bowel resection for, I:563–565 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 enemas for, II:1200 in Hartnup disease, III:1511 injuries of colostomy for, II:861 from radiation, IV:2809 large (See Large intestine) in listeriosis, III:2012 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2085–2086, IV:3173 perforation of (See Intestinal perforation) prolapse of, from enterostomies, II:1211 sex change surgery and, IV:3011 small (See Small intestine) in sodium absorption, III:1709, 1742 Intoxicating pepper. See Kava Intoxication vs. botulism, I:560 catatonia with, II:676 delirium with, II:1021, 1022 vs. dissociative disorders, II:1087 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 movement disorders from, III:2221 physical restraints for, IV:2760 Intoxication confusional state. See Delirium Intra-atrial baffle, II:902, III:1543 Intraarterial chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Intracapsular cataract extraction. See Cataract extraction Intracardiac pressure, II:656 Intracardiac tumors, III:2306 Intracavity radiation therapy. See Brachytherapy Intracerebral contusion, III:1520 Intracerebral hemorrhage, III:1520, IV:3199 See also Brain hemorrhage Intracranial hemorrhage head injuries from, III:1520 papilledema from, IV:2488 Intracranial hypertension from arbovirus encephalitis, I:347 barbiturate-induced coma for, I:443, 444 with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 from chest physical therapy, II:747 from CNS infections, II:690 from concussion, II:879 craniotomy and, II:948 from electric brain stimulation, II:1146 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 from meningitis, III:2156 from Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 from subdural hematoma, IV:3205 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from vaccines, V:3466 Intracranial pressure, IV:2488 Intractable hiccups, III:1631, 1632 Intractable pain, IV:2460 Intracytoplasmic sperm injection, III:1809, 1833 Intradermal allergy tests, I:117, 123–124 Intrahepatic cholestasis, II:783 Intralesional chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Intralesional injections, for acne, I:26 Intramural fibroids. See Uterine fibroids Intramuscular chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Intranasal examination, IV:2318 Intraneural spread, of meningitis, III:2154 Intraocular lens, for cataracts, II:671, 674–675, IV:2999 Intraocular melanoma, II:1260–1261 Intraocular pressure cholinergic agents for, II:795 eyelid edema and, II:1272 in glaucoma, III:1457–1460 from hyphema, III:1728 in retinal artery occlusion, IV:2875 from steroids, V:3462 tonometry for, II:1264 trabeculectomy for, V:3350, 3351 Intraocular retinoblastoma. See Retinoblastoma Intraocular tumor surgery, IV:2885 Intraosseous venous access, V:3494–3495 Intraperitoneal chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Intrathecal chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Intrauterine devices, III:1876–1877 for contraception, II:911 dysfunctional uterine bleeding from, II:1112 dysmenorrhea from, III:2170 ectopic pregnancy from, II:1131 infertility and, III:1825 menorrhagia and, III:2172 with mifepristone, III:2186 PID and, IV:2522 Intrauterine fetal death. See Stillbirth Intrauterine growth retardation. See Fetal growth retardation Intrauterine infection, II:891 Intravenous chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Intravenous drugs with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897, 1898 with liver cancer, III:2019 liver injuries from, II:816, 817 with melioidosis, III:2150, 2151 3799 Intravenous drugs vs. carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 from cholecystitis, II:779 vs. colic, II:847 colostomy for, II:861 from constipation, II:906 from Crohn’s disease, II:957, 958, 959 vs. cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:980 with dicyclomine, I:309 diverticulitis and diverticulosis from, II:1092 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 enterostomy and, II:1209, 1211 from geophagia, IV:2596 from hernias, III:1624 from hypercalcemia, III:1697 intussusception, III:1855–1856 lactic acid test for, III:1945 laxatives and, III:1964 lipase test for, III:2002 nasogastric suction for, IV:2320 Intestinal parasites. See Parasites Intestinal perforation amylase tests for, I:160 from antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 from balantidiasis, I:441 from cholecystectomy, II:778 from colonoscopy, II:858 from Crohn’s disease, II:957 from diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 E. coli infections and, II:1235, 1236 from fecal impaction, IV:3130 from hysteroscopy, III:1768 from kidney biopsy, III:1908 from necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 from paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 peritonitis from, IV:2556 ulcer surgery and, V:3428 from ulcerative colitis, V:3429 Intestinal polyps, I:562, III:1850–1851 Intestinal schistosomiasis, IV:2954 Intestinal surgery bowel preparation for, I:562–563 for Crohn’s disease, II:959 for duodenal atresia, II:1100 gangrene from, III:1394 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 for necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 Intestinal ulcer, IV:2328 Intestinal worms anal itching from, III:1875 pernicious anemia from, IV:2558 Intestinal x-ray, V:3292 Intestines bile and, II:773 cleansing of (See Bowel preparation) with cross infection, III:1674 cryptosporidia in, II:967 Intravenous drugs with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 osteomyelitis from, IV:2419 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3156 tuberculosis and, V:3406 Intravenous equipment for circulation, III:1999–2000 cross infection from, III:1674–1675 sepsis from, IV:3004 septic shock from, IV:3005 staphylococcal infections from, IV:3156, 3159 Intravenous fluid replenishment, III:1853–1854, IV:2370 for bleeding varices, I:517 for dehydration, II:1018 for drug overdose, II:1106 for E. coli infections, II:1237 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 in life support, III:2000 for pancreatitis, IV:2480 pellagra from, IV:2515 for placental abruption, IV:2613 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for poisoning, IV:2645 for premature labor, IV:2701 for prematurity, IV:2706 for pyloric stenosis, IV:2791 for septic shock, IV:3005 for shock, IV:3034, 3035 for toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3345 See also Fluid therapy Intravenous needles bacteremia from, I:436 endocarditis from, II:1183 Intravenous pyelography. See Intravenous urography Intravenous rehydration. See Intravenous fluid replenishment Intravenous therapy, IV:2370–2371 for Crohn’s disease, II:959 for gangrene, III:1395 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 for mineral deficiencies, III:2196–2197 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 for sedation, IV:2983 Intravenous urography, III:1854–1855 for bladder cancer, I:508 for cervical cancer, II:713 for kidney cancer, III:1910 for kidney stones, III:1917, 2015 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 vs. retrograde ureteropyelography, IV:2893 Intraventricular conduction defects, I:614 3800 Intraventricular hemorrhage with prematurity, IV:2706–2707 from respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 Intrinsic catatonia. See Catatonia Intrinsic factor, with pernicious anemia, IV:2557 Intron. See Interferon-alpha Intron A. See Interferon-alpha; Interferon alpha 2b Intropin. See Dopamine hydrochloride Introversion, III:2286 Intubation cross infection from, III:1674 for croup, II:960 for drug overdose, II:1105 for epiglottitis, II:1220 for gastric acid determination, III:1400 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 with nasogastric suctioning, IV:2319–2320 for near drowning, IV:2327 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 for respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2865 for stridor, IV:3194 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 Intussusception, III:1855–1857 from adenoviruses, I:57 intestinal obstruction as, III:1848 from intestinal polyps, III:1850 Inula Helenium. See Elecampane Inverse psoriasis, IV:2756 Inversion rupture of uterus, IV:2383, 2385 Inverted papilloma, IV:2315 Invirase. See Saquinavir Involution, lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 Involved field radiation therapy, III:1646, 1647 Iodides, hypothyroidism from, III:1756 Iodine allergy to, III:1382 as antiseptic, I:307, 308 in arthrography, I:359 in brachytherapy, IV:2815 with cardiac catheterization, II:657 in CAT scan, II:876 in goiters, III:1470 for hyperthyroidism, III:1725 for liver biopsy, III:2018 physical allergy from, IV:2592 PTHC and, IV:2532 radioactive (See Radioactive iodine) supplements of, III:2196 toxicity, III:2194–2195 Iodine-125, III:2194 Iodine deficiency, III:1756, 2190–2193 Iodine deficient diet, V:3306 Iodine uptake test. See Radioactive iodine, uptake scan Iodoquinol for amebiasis, I:145 for balantidiasis, I:441 for protozoan infections, I:298 Ionamin. See Phentermine Ionizing radiation for arteriovenous malformations, I:358 lymphomas from, III:2092 radiation injuries and, IV:2806–2808 recurrent miscarriages and, IV:2836 IOP. See Intraocular pressure Ipecac, III:1857–1859 activated charcoal and, I:368, II:731 for drug overdose, II:1105, 1106 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 Ipecacuanha, III:1857, 1858 Ipomoea. See Morning glory Ipratropium allergies to, I:601 as bronchodilators, I:601 Ipratropium bromide, I:120 IQ. See Intelligence IQ tests. See Intelligence tests Irbesartan, for hypertension, I:279–281 IRD. See Infantile Refsum disease Iridectomy for eye cancer, II:1261 with trabeculectomy, V:3351 Iridocyclectomy, II:1261 Iridocyclitis, V:3460 Iridotomy, III:1459 Iridotrabeculectomy, II:1261 Irinotecan, IV:2476 Iris (Eyes) cancer of (See Intraocular melanoma) eye examination for, II:1263 in glaucoma, III:1458, 1459 Irish daisy. See Dandelion Iritis from ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 in uveitis, V:3460 Iron for anemia, I:183, II:1061 buildup, joint biopsy for, III:1888 with caffeine, II:626 for canker sores, IV:3170 constipation from, II:906 erythropoietin and, III:1792 after gastrectomy, III:1399 for glomerulonephritis, III:1462 hemoglobin and, III:1576 for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 for hookworm disease, III:1668 indigestion from, III:1813 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 vs. travelers diarrhea, V:3380 Irritant contact dermititis. See Contact dermatitis Irritant laxatives, III:1963–1964 Ischemia, III:1868–1872, 1870 acute kidney failure from, I:44 angina pectoris from, I:194 bowel (See Bowel ischemia) from Buerger’s disease, I:611 colostomy for, II:861 coronary artery bypass grafting for, II:925 from coronary heart disease, II:929 exercise test for, IV:3191 from heart attacks, III:1534 hypotension from, III:1752 osteochondrosis from, IV:2416 paresthesia from, IV:2365 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 from Raynaud disease, IV:2824 from retinal vein occlusion, IV:2878 sympathectomy for, IV:3224 from ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 Ischemic cardiomyopathy. See Congestive cardiomyopathy Ischemic heart disease. See Myocardial ischemia Ischemic stroke. See Stroke ISG. See Immune serum globulin Ishihara test, for color blindness, II:860 Islet cell cancer. See Endocrine pancreatic cancer Isocarboxazid with bupropion, IV:3111 for depression, III:2213 Isoelectric focusing, IV:3044 Isoenzymes alkaline phosphatase and, I:106 in drug metabolism, II:1102 in pyruvate kinase, IV:2793 Isoflurane, for general anesthesia, I:186 Isokinetic exercise. See Exercise Isolation, patient. See Patient isolation Isometric exercise. See Exercise Isonate. See Nitrates Isoniazid with acetaminophen, I:19 with alprazolam, I:233 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788 parathyroid hormone test and, IV:2495 pellagra from, IV:2515 pleurisy from, IV:2631 with protein electrophoresis, IV:2747 for tuberculosis, I:310–311, 312, 313, V:3409 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 Isoporiasis, with AIDS, I:76 Isoproterenol GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1071 tilt table test and, V:3322 Isoptin. See Verapamil Isordil. See Isosorbide dinitrate Isosorbide dinitrate for angina pectoris, I:229 for heart attacks, III:1534 race differences and, IV:2573 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Isosorbide mononitrate for bleeding varices, I:517 for heart attacks, III:1534 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Isothiocyanates, for cancer, II:637 Isotonic exercise. See Exercise Isotonic hyponatremia. See Overhydration Isotretinoin for acne, I:26, 27, 226–229 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for rosacea, IV:2918 skin resurfacing and, IV:3080 Isoxuprine, for hypertension, I:279–281 Isradipine, for hypertension, II:629 Italian honeysuckle. See Honeysuckle Itching, III:1874–1876 from atopic dermatitis, I:403 from decompression sickness, II:1009 drugs for, I:284–286 from fluoroquinolones, II:1345, 1346 from lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 from minoxidil, III:2203 from photosensitivity, IV:2589 in polycythemia vera, IV:2658, 2659–2660 from psoralens, V:3436 from scabies, IV:2949 from seborrheic dermatitis, IV:2980 ITP. See Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Itraconazole for aspergillosis, I:376 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for blastomycosis, IV:3121 with buspirone, I:233 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cross infection, III:1675 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 for sporotrichosis, IV:3143 for systemic fungal infection, I:267, 269 IUD. See Intrauterine devices IV therapy. See Intravenous therapy Ivermectin for elephantiasis, II:1168 for filariasis, II:1331 for onchocerciasis infestations, I:273 3801 Invermectin for iron deficiency anemia, III:1861–1862 with kidney cancer, III:1909 for lead poisoning, III:1968 levels in tests, III:1863, 1864 in liver cancer, III:2019 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 in malnutrition, III:2104 for menorrhagia, III:2172 for nephritis, IV:2334 overload (See Hemochromatosis) for parasitic diseases, I:275 with pernicious anemia, IV:2559 for platelet function disorders, IV:2626 poisoning, III:1560–1561, 1863 during pregnancy, IV:2712 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 supplements of, III:2196, 2197 with tetracyclines, V:3267 toxicity, III:2194–2195 transport, II:1369 for vegetarians, V:3487 Iron deficiency, III:2190–2192 bone marrow aspiration for, I:549 canker sores from, IV:3170 complete blood count for, I:521 with fifth disease, II:1329 pica and, IV:2595 Iron deficiency anemia, I:180, III:1860–1862 vs. Goodpasture’s syndrome, I:423 from phlebotomy, IV:2580, 2581 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 red blood cell indices for, IV:2838, 2839 reticulocyte count for, IV:2875 after ulcer surgery, V:3428 Iron overload, from hemochromatosis, III:1572 Iron supplements for anemic anoxia, I:217 drug interactions with, II:1102 with epoetin, II:643 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 Iron tests, III:1475, III:1862–1865 Irradiation treatments. See Radiation therapy Irreducible hernia. See Hernia Irregular astigmatism. See Astigmatism Irregular heart beats. See Arrhythmia Irritable bowel syndrome, III:1865, 1865–1868 alkaline phosphatase and, I:107 biofeedback for, I:482 constipation and, II:906 dicyclomine for, I:308 with dyspepsia, II:1119 E. coli infections and, II:1235, 1237 gas from, I:271 iron deficiency anemia from, III:1860 Invermectin for strongyloidiasis, V:3292 IVF. See Fertilization in vitro Ivory bones. See Osteopetrosis Ivy method. See Bleeding time Ixodes, I:433 Ixodes dammini, I:433 Ixodes scapularis babesiosis from, I:433 ehrlichiosis from, II:1142 Iyengar, B.K.S., III:1514, V:3595 Iyengar yoga, III:1514, V:3595 See also Yoga J J-pouch procedure. See Restorative proctocolectomy Jack-in-the-pulpit poisoning, IV:2644 Jacksonian seizures, IV:2985 Jainism, vegetarianism and, V:3485 Jalepenos, for deviated septum, II:1045 JAMA. See Journal of the American Medical Association Japanese acupuncture, I:41 Japanese encephalitis, I:347, II:1178, III:1879–1880, V:3465 Japanese honeysuckle. See Honeysuckle Japanese jin yin hua. See Honeysuckle Japanese quince, for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 Jarcho-Levin syndrome, IV:2661 Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction in leptospirosis, III:1982 in relapsing fever, IV:2853 in syphilis, IV:3230 Jasmine for atopic dermatitis, I:405 poisoning from, IV:2643 Jasminum officinale. See Jasmine Jaundice, III:1880–1885, 1881, 1882 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 from autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 from benzodiazepines, I:468 from biliary atresia, I:479–480 in cholangitis, II:774 from cholecystitis, II:779 from cholestasis, II:784 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 from echinococcosis, II:1128 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1229 from fatty liver, II:1298 from fluke infection, II:1342 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 gallbladder cancer and, III:1379, 1380 from hemolytic anemia, III:1579 from hepatitis A, III:1596–1597 3802 from hepatitis B, III:1600, 1610–1611 from hepatitis C, III:1603 from hepatitis D, III:1606 from hepatitis E, III:1608 itching from, III:1874 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 from leptospirosis, III:1981 liver biopsy for, III:2017 from liver cancer, III:2020 liver cirrhosis and, II:816 liver function tests for, III:2025, 2026 nausea with, IV:2324, 2325 neonatal (See Neonatal jaundice) from oxytocin, II:1109 from pancreatic cancer, IV:2469 with pancreatic cancer, IV:2474 from prematurity, IV:2706 PTHC for, IV:2533 from pyruvate kinase deficiency, IV:2794 from roseola, IV:2920 from sickle cell disease, IV:3044 from stomach ulcers, V:3432 from TORCH syndrome, V:3338 from toxoplasmosis, V:3349 urinalysis for, V:3446 in yellow fever, V:3590–3591 Jaundice root. See Goldenseal Jaw dysfunction, from bruxism, I:609 injuries fixation devices for, III:1885 from maxillofacial trauma, III:2135–2136 neurologic examination for, IV:2351 pain, I:609, IV:3110 reflex, in death, II:1005 spasm of, III:2222 with tooth extraction, V:3334 Jaw fixation techniques, III:1885–1886, IV:2376 Jaw fractures from maxillofacial trauma, III:2135–2136 from tooth extraction, III:1800, V:3334 Jaw wiring. See Jaw fixation techniques JC virus with AIDS, I:77 progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy from, IV:2720 Jealousy, in delusions, II:1023 Jejunoileal bypass, IV:2380 Jejunostomy, II:1210 bacteremia from, I:436 for enteral nutrition, V:3401 Jellyfish stings. See Bites and stings Jellyfish venoms. See Venoms Jenner, Edward, IV:3097 Jervell and Lange-Neilsen syndrome, IV:2724 Jet lag, III:1886–1888 phototherapy for, IV:2590 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 Jewelweed, for contact dermititis, I:121, II:910 Jiang huang. See Turmeric Jimsonweed delirium from, II:1021 poisoning from, IV:2644 Jin shin do, I:37 Jin Shin Jyutsu. See Acupressure Jnana yoga, V:3595 See also Yoga Job safety. See Industrial safety Johns Hopkins University on IBS, III:1866 on sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Johnson, Charles F., II:754 Johnson, Virginia E., IV:2699 Joint biopsy, III:1888 Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, III:1426 Joint damage from Charcot’s joints, II:736 from infectious arthritis, III:1820 from rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2899–2902 Joint diseases arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 from Mycoplasma, III:2278 neuropathic, II:736–737 osteoarthritis (See Osteoarthritis) ozone therapy for, IV:2451 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1889–1890 from yersiniosis, V:3592 Joint dislocations. See Dislocations Joint fluid. See Synovial fluid Joint fusion, for sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 Joint infections fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 from gonorrhea, III:1472 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2013 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 with XLA, V:3585 See also Infectious arthritis Joint mobilization, with contractures, II:913–914 Joint pain. See Arthralgia Joint radiography. See Arthrography Joint replacement, III:1890, 1890–1892, IV:2410 vs. arthroplasty, I:362 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414, 2999 for Paget’s disease, IV:2456 in plastic surgery, IV:2621 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 tooth extraction and, V:3332 See also Arthroplasty GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for premature labor, IV:2701 Junctional epidermolysis bullosa, II:1217 Junctional moles. See Nevus Jung, Carl, I:368, III:2286 Jungian dance therapy. See Dance therapy Juniper, for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 Juniper berries, for bladder stones, I:511 Juvenile arthritis, III:1892–1895, V:3417–3419, 3418 Juvenile diabetes. See Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus Juvenile periodontitis, IV:2546 Juvenile polyps. See Children, rectal polyps in Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 vs. Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 vs. rheumatoid arthritis, III:1893 with uveitis, V:3461 Juvenile scoliosis. See Scoliosis K K lymphocytes, III:2068 Kabat-Zinn, Jon, III:2147–2148 Kabikinase. See Streptokinase Kabinkinase. See Streptokinase Kala-Azar fever. See Visceral leishmaniasis Kali muriaticum, I:121 Kalium bichromium, IV:3059 Kallmann’s syndrome. See Hypogonadism Kanamycin, I:150, 151 hearing loss from, III:1528 stool fats and, IV:3173 Kanamycin sulfate for bowel resection, I:564 for colostomy, II:862 with urinary diversion, V:3452 Kaneda device. See Spinal instrumentation Kanners syndrome. See Autism Kaopectate. See Attapulgite Kapha dosha, in ayurvedic medicine, I:430 Kaplan, Dr. Helen Singer, IV:2699 Kaposi, Moricz, III:1897 Kaposi’s sarcoma, I:78, 79, III:1897–1900, 1898, 1899 alpha interferon for, III:1792 vs. bacillary angiomatosis, I:434 eyelid tumors and, II:1272 gay health and, III:1415 multiple myeloma and, III:2239 skin lesions from, IV:3076 Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus, III:1898 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Karam. See Myrrh Karma yoga, V:3595 See also Yoga Kartagener’s syndrome. See Primary ciliary dyskinesia Karyotype in chromosome analysis, III:1434–1435 in cri du chat syndrome, II:955 in Down syndrome, II:1099, 1100 in Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 in Patau syndrome, IV:2510 in Turner syndrome and, V:3417 Kasai procedure, I:480 Katayama fever, IV:2954 Katz, Jack, I:415 Katz, Richard, II:1338–1339 Kaufmann Assessment Battery for Children, III:2175 Kava kava with central nervous system depressants, II:689 for PMS, IV:2711 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 Kawasaki syndrome, III:1900–1902, 1901 with vasculitis, V:3479 vs, paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 Kayser-Fleischer rings, V:3567–3568 Kearns-Sayre syndrome, IV:2394 Keflex. See Cephalexin Kefzol. See Cefazolin Kegel exercises for bladder control, I:511 for bladder stones, I:511 for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 for pelvic relaxation, IV:2524, 2525 to reduce need for episiotomy, II:1222 for urinary incontinence, III:2123, V:3455 Kellogg, John Harvey, IV:2322, 2368, V:3485 Kellogg, Will Keith, V:3485 Keloid. See Scar tissue Keloids, III:1903–1904 Kelp acne, III:2194 Kemadrin. See Procyclidine Keratin keratosis pilaris from, III:1907 in lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 Keratitis, III:1904–1906, 1905 from adenoviruses, I:57 corneal ulcers from, II:921 Keratoconjunctivitis, I:57, 58 Keratoconus astigmatism from, I:385 corneal transplant for, II:919 radial keratotomy and, IV:2804 3803 Keratoconus Joint resection. See Arthroplasty Joint surgery, IV:2409–2410 for Charcot’s joints, II:736 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 Joint tap. See Synovial fluid analysis Joints abnormalities of, I:555 from cutis laxa, II:978 from gout, III:1479 arthroscopy for, I:364–366 cavity, in rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2899–2900 contracture of, II:913–914 drainage of, for infectious arthritis, III:1821 exercises for motion (See Range of motion exercises) fractures of, II:1365 with hemophilus infections, III:1587 injuries of arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 sprains, IV:3147 in juvenile arthritis, III:1893 in manipulation, IV:2422 MRI imaging of, III:2082 in muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267 in osteochondrosis, IV:2415–2416 in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 sensory receptors in Charcot’s joints, II:736 in motion sickness, III:2218 x-rays for, I:556 Jois, K. Patabhi, III:1514 Jones criteria, IV:2898, 3223 Journal of Clinical Investigation, IV:3052 Journal of Clinical Oncology on alternative cancer treatments, III:1953 The Journal of Family Practice on therapeutic touch, V:3283 Journal of the American Medical Association, III:2120 on contact dermititis, II:908 on diarrhea, II:1067 on genital warts, V:3548 on sildenafil citrate, IV:3054 Journals for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 for migraines, III:2188 for self mutilation, IV:2994 for sleep disorders, IV:3092 JRA. See Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis Judgment assessment, IV:2351 Jugular vein, V:3502 Juice fasts. See Fasting Juice therapy, II:1294 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 Keratolytics Keratolytics, for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 Keratomalacia, IV:3161, V:3512 Keratometry, for astigmatism, I:386 Keratoplasty. See Corneal transplantation Keratoses. See Keratosis Keratosis, III:1715 actinic (See Actinic keratosis) papule and plaques from, IV:3075 visual impairment from, V:3510 Keratosis pilaris, III:1906–1907 Keratotomy. See Radial keratotomy Kerner, Justinius, I:559 Kernicterus from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1229 liver function tests for, III:2027 from neonatal jaundice, IV:2330 Kerosene delirium from, II:1021 ipecac and, III:1857, 1858 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234 Keshan disease from selenium deficiency, III:2192, 2193 selenium for, III:2196 Ketalar. See Ketamine Ketamine abuse of, IV:3207 for general anesthesia, I:187 Ketoacidosis. See Diabetic ketoacidosis Ketoconazole with alprazolam, I:233 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 for athlete’s foot, I:399 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for blastomycosis, I:513, IV:3121 with cisapride, I:273 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cross infection, III:1675 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 with cyclosporine, III:1798 for fungal infections, I:270 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 hypogonadism from, III:1738 impotence from, III:1805 for mycetoma, III:2275 for onychomycosis, IV:2390–2391 for systemic fungal infection, I:267, 268, 269 Ketogenic diets. See Low carbohydrate diet Ketone tests, for diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1056 Ketones acidosis from, II:1055, III:2179, 2180 in diabetes mellitus, II:1048, 1049, 1050 urinalysis for, V:3446 3804 Ketonuria hyperemesis gravidarum and, III:1703 urinalysis for, V:3446 Ketoprofen aspirin allergy and, I:378 for costochondritis, II:940 with gout drugs, III:1480 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for pain, IV:2462 Ketorolac, I:174, IV:2361 Ketosis, fasting and, II:1293–1294 Ketostix, for diabetes mellitus, II:1050 Kevorkian, Dr. Jack, II:1006 Khellin, for allergies, I:121 Khubkalan, for measles, III:2140 Kidney abnormalities of, III:2149 acid phosphatase in, I:23 with aging, I:69 aspartate aminotransferase in, I:374 with calcium, III:1696 CAT scan of, II:875 in chelation therapy, III:1561 in congenital ureter anomalies, II:894, 895 in cutis laxa, II:978 cysts in (See Cystic kidney) damage to (See Kidney damage) diseases of (See Kidney diseases) failure of (See Kidney failure) in Hartnup disease, III:1511 in heart failure, III:1537 hypokalemia and, III:1739 inflammation of, V:3446 intravenous urography for, III:1854 lactate dehydrogenase in, III:1939, 1941 removal of (See Nephrectomy) swelling of (See Hydronephrosis) in urinary tract infections, V:3447 x-rays of, III:1923–1924 Kidney angiography, I:198 Kidney biopsy, III:1907–1909 for acute kidney failure, I:45 for allergic purpura, I:110 for Alport’s syndrome, I:131 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 for glomerulonephritis, III:1462 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1776 for immune complex test, III:1784 for kidney cancer, III:1910 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 Kidney cancer, II:631, 632, III:1909–1912, 1910 aldesleukin for, III:1791 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 brain tumor from, I:569 chronic kidney failure from, II:806 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 intravenous urography for, III:1855 kidney biopsy for, III:1907 nephrectomy for, IV:2332 Wilm’s tumor and, V:3564 See also Cancer; Renal cell carcinoma; Wilm’s tumor Kidney cysts. See Cystic kidney Kidney damage from amyloidosis, I:161–162 from antacids, III:1554 from antiviral drugs, I:316, 317 from ARDS, I:68 from benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 beta2-microglobulin test for, I:473 from chemotherapy, I:574, II:742, III:1647 from congenital ureter anomalies, II:894, 895 creatinine test for, II:949 from Crohn’s disease, II:957 from dengue fever, II:1028 from diabetes, IV:2467 from diverticulum, II:888 from drug overdose, II:1105, 1106 from E. coli infections, II:1237 from endocarditis, II:1183 from Fabry’s disease, III:2003, 2005 from folic acid toxicity, V:3523 with gallbladder x-ray, III:1382 from generalized pustular psoriasis, IV:2756 from Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 from heart surgery, III:1544 from hemorrhagic fevers, III:1592 from hydronephrosis, III:1689 from hyperaldosteronism, III:1696 hypertension and, III:1720–1721 from kidney biopsy, III:1908 from life support, III:2001 from liver biopsy, III:2018 from nephritis, IV:2333, 2334 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 from secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 from serum sickness, IV:3008 from strep throat, IV:3120 from toxins, IV:2336–2338 urinalysis for, V:3443, 3446 from vesicoureteral reflux, V:3505, 3506 from vitamin toxicity, V:3522 Kidney dialysis. See Hemodialysis Kidney diseases with ACE inhibitors, I:204 with acetaminophen, I:19 acidosis from, III:2179 acute kidney failure from, I:44 with albinism, I:90 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from gout, III:1476 with gout drugs, III:1480 gynecomastia with, III:1497 with heart transplantation, III:1545 hematuric, III:1775–1776 from hemolytic uremic syndrome, II:1205 with hepatitis G, III:1609 high-risk pregnancy and, III:1632 hypercholesterolemia from, III:1699 hyperkalemia from, III:1705 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1707 hypernatremia from, III:1710 with hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 hypogonadism from, III:1738 hyponatremia from, III:1742 ileus from, III:1779 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1793 with joint replacement, III:1891 from juvenile arthritis, III:1894 kidney angiography for, I:198 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 Legionnaires’ disease with, III:1972 from leptospirosis, III:1981 with listeriosis, III:2012 with lung transplantation, III:2054 with lymphography, III:2066 magnesium poisoning from, III:2079 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 medullary sponge kidney (See Medullary sponge kidney) menorrhagia from, II:1112 with methadone, III:2182 with methenamine, V:3447 from nail-patella syndrome, IV:2308 nephrectomy for, IV:2332 with nitrofurantoin, V:3448 normocytic anemia from, IV:2839 with NSAIDs, IV:2362, 2414 with opioid analgesics, I:177 overhydration from, IV:2448 with oxytocin, II:1109 paracentesis for, IV:2490 with penicillins, IV:2528 pleural effusion from, IV:2628 polycystic, IV:2651–2654, 2652 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 from prostatitis, IV:2740, 2741 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747, 2748 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2743 proteinuria, III:1776 pulmonary artery catheterization for, IV:2777 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 pyelonephritis, IV:2790 from scarlet fever, IV:2951 from scleroderma, IV:2967 from sickle cell disease, IV:3044 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 sleep disorders with, IV:3000 SSRIs with, IV:2992 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, IV:3160 stones (See Kidney stones) with sulfonamides, IV:3217 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:268 with tetracyclines, V:3267 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3312 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 triiodothyronine levels and, V:3312 tumor erythropoietin test for, II:1234 plasma renin activity for, IV:2618 ultrasonography for, I:2 uric acid tests for, V:3442 urinalysis for, V:3443, 3446 with vasodilators, V:3483 venography and, V:3492 from Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 Kidney failure from abdominal fluid, IV:2490 acidosis from, III:2179 acute (See Acute kidney failure) from Addison’s disease, I:54 from allergic purpura, I:110 from Alport’s syndrome, I:131 amylase tests for, I:160 from aneurysmectomy, I:193 from anorexia nervosa, I:212 from APSGN, I:48 ascites from, I:372 with aspirin, I:378 from atherosclerosis, I:394 beriberi and, I:469 chronic (See Chronic kidney failure) from chronic glomerulonephritis, III:1462 from congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 constipation from, II:906 from cystinuria, II:990 from diabetes mellitus, II:1048 dialysis for (See Hemodialysis) from diarrhea, II:1066 from drug overdose, II:1104, 1106 E. coli infections and, II:1235, 1236, III:1581 from eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2693 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154, 1155 electrolyte imbalance from, II:1157 enteral nutrition for, V:3401 from falciparum malaria, III:2089 3805 Kidney failure from aldosterone, I:205 with aldosteronism, I:101 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 with alpha1-adrenergic blockers, I:129 with aminoglycosides, I:150, 151, 242 angiography for, I:198 with antacids, I:218 with anti-insomnia agents, I:284 with antiangina agents, I:230 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 with anticancer agents, I:248 with antidiarrhea drugs, I:265 with antihelminthic drugs, I:275 with antihistamines, I:278 with antimigraine agents, I:290 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 with antirheumatic drugs, I:306 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311 with Atkins diet, I:402 bad breath from, I:437 with barbiturates, I:446 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 with benzodiazepines, I:467 beta2-microglobulin test for, I:473 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 calcium channel blockers with, I:204 from cardiac tamponade, II:661 with cellulitis, II:684 with cephalosporins, II:694 chemotherapy with, II:740 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790, 791 with cisapride, I:272 with colony stimulating factors, II:643 with complement deficiencies, II:874 cystitis from, II:992 dehydration from, II:1017 from diabetes mellitus, II:1052 with diabetic foot infections, II:1053 dialysis for (See Hemodialysis) with dicyclomine, I:309 with digitalis, II:1074 diuretics and, II:1089 with Down syndrome, II:1099 edema from, II:1134 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154, 1155 from endocarditis, II:1183 enteral nutrition for, V:3400 with epididymitis, II:1218 ESR and, II:1231 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 flesh-eating disease with, II:1337 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 glomerular (See Glomerulonephritis) from Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 Kidney failure from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1291 from food poisoning, II:1356 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 from Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475–1476 from gout, III:1479 from heart valve replacement, III:1552 from heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 from hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1775 high cholesterol and, II:789, 790 from hyperaldosteronism, III:1696 hyperkalemia from, III:1705–1706 from hypertension, II:929 from hypocalcemia, III:1732 from hypothermia, III:1754 from intestinal obstruction, III:1848 itching from, III:1874 jaundice from, III:1882 kidney scans for, III:1915 kidney transplantation for, III:1919 Korsakoff’s syndrome from, III:1930 lactic acid test for, III:1945 with Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 from leptospirosis, III:1980–1982 lipase test for, III:2002 malnutrition from, III:2104 from medullary sponge kidney, III:2150 with mucormycosis, III:2231 from mushroom poisoning, III:2267 after nephrectomy, IV:2332 from nephritis, IV:2334 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337–2338 neutrophilia from, III:1993 NRTIs and, I:304 NSAIDs and, I:175 pericardial effusion from, IV:2536 pericarditis from, IV:2538 peripheral neuropathy and, IV:2551 from placental abruption, IV:2613 pleurisy from, IV:2631 from polycystic kidney disease, IV:2652 prolactin test and, IV:2724 psychosis from, IV:2766 with respiratory insufficiency, IV:2867 with RMSF, IV:2910 from shigellosis, IV:3028 from thyroid crisis, III:1725 thyroxine levels and, V:3310 from toxic shock syndrome, V:3347 from travelers diarrhea, V:3379 from vasculitis, V:3479 vasodilators for, V:3482 with ventricular assist devices, V:3497, 3498 3806 in Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3544 Kidney function in Addison’s disease, I:53 blood gas analysis for, I:527 in cystinuria, II:990 in diabetes insipidus, II:1046 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290, 1291 with glomerulonephritis, III:1462 in Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 from hyperkalemia, III:1705 in hyperkalemia, III:2194 in hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 in hypocalcemia, III:1732 liver function and, III:2024 with living donors, III:1922 with lymphomas, III:2092 with myoglobin, III:2292 nuclear scan for, III:1914–1916 with plasmapheresis, IV:2619 in renal tubular acidosis, IV:2858 in sodium absorption, III:1709, 1742 tests for, III:1912–1914 Kidney function tests, III:1912–1914 for nephritis, IV:2333 with neurologic examination, IV:2352 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 for Wilm’s tumor, V:3565 Kidney scan, III:1914–1916, 1915 See also X-rays, kidney Kidney stones, III:1916–1919, 1917, 1918f acute kidney failure from, I:44 with anticancer agents, I:248 bladder cancer from, I:507 vs. bladder stones, I:510 from Crohn’s disease, II:957 from cystinuria, II:990 cystitis from, II:992 cystoscopy for, II:996 with diuretics, II:1089 gout and, III:1479, 1480 hydronephrosis from, III:1689, 1690 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1714 hyperuricemia and, I:281 intravenous urography for, III:1855 lithotripsy for, III:2014–2016 with low back pain, III:2032 in medullary sponge kidney, III:2149–2150 in men, III:2167 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 with renal tubular acidosis, IV:2858 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 ultrasonography for, I:2, 5 ureteral stents for, V:3439 urethritis with, V:3440 uric acid tests for, V:3442 from uricosuric drugs, III:1477 urinalysis for, V:3446 from vitamin C toxicity, V:3523 x-rays of, III:1923–1924 Kidney surgery for renal vein thrombosis, IV:2859 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 Kidney transplantation, III:1919–1923, 1920f, 1921, 1922t with ACE inhibitors, I:204 alemtuzumab for, I:102 for allergic purpura, I:110 Alport’s syndrome and, I:130, 131 for amyloidosis, I:162 beta2-microglobulin test after, I:473 for chronic kidney failure, I:46, II:808 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 vs. dialysis, II:1059 after drug overdose, II:1106 after escherichia coli, III:1581 for Fabry’s disease, III:2005 Fanconi’s syndrome and, II:1290, 1291 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795, 1796 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 kidney scans for, III:1915 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 with lymphomas, III:2093 nephrectomy for, IV:2332 for nephrotoxic injury, IV:2338 nuclear scan for, III:1915 with pancreatic transplantation, IV:2467 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 renal tubular acidosis from, IV:2858 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3234 Kidney ultrasonography, IV:2789 Kiesselbach’s plexus, IV:2364 Killed polio vaccine. See Salk vaccine Killer cells lymphocyte tests for, III:2068 lymphokine-activated, II:641 Kim-Ray-Greenfield filter, V:3491 Kinesiology for angina pectoris, I:195–196 applied, I:343–346, III:1924–1927 for bursitis, I:621 for hypoglycemia, III:1736 for stress reduction, IV:3190 King’s crown. See Cramp bark Kinnickinick. See Bearberry Kissing bugs. See Triatominae GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 vs. skin culture, IV:3068 Kohl, lead poisoning from, III:1965 Kola nut, for drug addictions, II:833 Konapin. See Clonazepam Koplik’s spots, III:2139 Korean ginseng, III:1454–1457, 1455 Korsakoff’s psychosis. See Korsakoff’s syndrome Korsakoff’s syndrome, III:1930–1931 from alcoholism, I:91, 92, 94, 96, 98, 469 amnesia with, I:152, 153 Krabbe leukodystrophy. See Krabbe’s disease Krabbe’s disease, III:2004, 2005 Kramer, Edith, I:368 Krieger, Dolores, V:3281–3283 Kripalu yoga, III:1514 Kruger’s classification, for semen analysis, IV:2995 KS. See Kaposi’s sarcoma KSHV. See Kaposi’s sarcoma-associated herpesvirus KUB x-ray study, III:1923, 1923–1924 Kübler-Ross, Elisabeth, II:1005 Kudzu, for alcoholism, IV:3211 Kudzu vine. See Kudzu Kuhnt-Junius macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration Kunz, Dora, V:3281, 3283 Kupffer cell sarcoma, III:2019 Kuru, vs. Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:950 Kwashiorkor, IV:2743–2744, 3161 Kwell. See Lindane Kwiatkowska, Hanna Yaxz, I:368 Kyphoscoliosis, II:1139 Kyphosis, III:1931–1933, 1932 from Marfan syndrome, III:2115, 2117 from muscular dystrophy, III:2263 osteochondrosis from, IV:2416 Kytril. See Granisetron L L-Caine. See Lidocaine L-Dopa for Huntington disease, III:1683 for Parkinson disease, IV:2502, 2503 L-dopa. See Levodopa L-methionine. See Methionine Laban, Rudolf, III:2225 Laban movement analysis, III:2225 Labeled red cell scintigram. See Liver scan Labetolol, for hypertension, I:279–281 Labia majora GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in chancroid, II:729 in female genital mutilation, II:1306 with genital herpes, III:1441 Labia minora in chancroid, II:729 in female genital mutilation, II:1306 with genital herpes, III:1441 Labial herpes. See Cold sore Labor, II:756 arteriovenous malformation hemorrhage from, I:357 breech presentation, I:594 chlamydial pneumonia from, II:771 cytomegalovirus infections from, II:1000 drugs for, II:1108–1109 electronic fetal monitoring during, II:1161–1162 with episiotomy, II:1221 hemorrhoids from, I:275 with hepatitis B, III:1602 induced (See Induced labor) local anesthesia for, I:191 with multiple pregnancy, III:2248–2249 music therapy for, III:2271 opioid analgesics for, I:175 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2703–2705 Laboratory tests. See Diagnostic tests Labyrinth with audiometry, I:414 in balance, IV:2371–2372 in dizziness, II:1095 infections of, III:1935 in Meniere’s disease, III:2151 in motion sickness, III:2218 surgery of, II:1123 Labyrinthectomy, III:2152 Labyrinthitis, III:1935–1936 Laceration repair, III:1936–1938, 1937f Lacerations. See Injuries; Wounds Lachesis for arrhythmias, I:354 for palpitations, IV:2466 for sore throats, IV:3120 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Lacrimal apparatus. See Lacrimal duct obstruction Lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1938–1939 in conjuntivitis, II:904 in dacryocystitis, II:1003 disorders of (See Dacryocystitis) from Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3063 from trachoma, V:3356 Lacrimal fractures. See Nasal trauma beta-Lactam, I:150, 240, III:2278 beta-Lactamase inhibitors, IV:2527 Lactase deficiency of 3807 Lactase Kissing disease. See Infectious mononucleosis Klebsiella cultures for, V:3579 cystitis from, II:992 enterobacterial infections from, II:1204 Klebsiella pneumoniae empyema from, II:1176 otitis externa from, IV:2431 sputum culture for, IV:3150 Kleine-Levin syndrome, IV:3087 Kleptomania, III:1807–1808 Klinefelter syndrome, III:1926–1928, V:3256 choriocarcinomas from, II:797 FSH test for, II:1350 gynecomastia from, III:1497 sex hormone tests for, IV:3014 Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome, IV:2661 Klonipin. See Clonazepam Klonopin. See Clonazepam Knee bursitis of, I:620 corns and calluses of, II:923 gout in, III:1479 knock (See Genu valgus) pain, kneecap removal for, III:1928, IV:2410 Knee injuries arthrography for, I:359–360, I:360 chondromalacia patellae from, II:795–796 Knee joint arthroplasty for, I:361 arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 arthroscopy for, I:364, I:365 biopsy of, III:1888 Charcot’s joints in, II:736 erosion in, II:795–796 with juvenile arthritis, III:1893 in osteoarthritis, IV:2412 sprains of, IV:3147 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1889 Knee prosthesis, III:1891 Knee replacement arthroplasty, III:1890 vs. kneecap removal, III:1928 for osteoarthritis, IV:3001 Kneecap abnormal alignment, II:795, 796 removal of, III:1928, IV:2410 Kneecap removal, III:1928, IV:2410 Kneipp, Sebastian, III:1691, III:1692 Knit back. See Comfrey Knitbone. See Comfrey Knock knees. See Genu valgus Koch, William, IV:2450 Koch pouch, II:1209 KOH test, III:1929 for athlete’s foot, I:399 for mucormycosis, III:2232 Lactase lactose intolerance from, III:1945 vs. travelers diarrhea, V:3380 hypoglycemia from, III:1735 for lactose intolerance, II:650, III:1946 Lactate dehydrogenase in E. coli infections, II:1236 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 in renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 tests for (See Lactate dehydrogenase test) Lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test, III:1939–1941 Lactate dehydrogenase isoenzymes, III:1941–1942 normal levels of, III:1940 with troponins test, V:3396 Lactate dehydrogenase test, III:1939, III:1941–1942 vs. aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 for E. coli, II:1236 for liver cancer, III:2019 for sarcomas, IV:2943 vs. troponins test, V:3396 Lactate ion, III:1944 Lactation, III:1942–1944 calcium levels and, III:1713 in males, III:1375 See also Breastfeeding Lactic acid acidosis from, III:2179, 2180 anoxia and, I:217 lactate dehydrogenase and, III:1941 in lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 test of, III:1944–1945 Lactic acid test. See Serum lactate test Lactic acidosis, III:1944–1945 from metformin, I:263 from NRTIs, I:304 Lactic dehydrogenase. See Lactate dehydrogenase Lacto-ovo vegetarianism, V:3484, 3485, 3487 Lactobacillus, III:2024 Lactobacillus acidophilus for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239–240 for diarrhea, II:1067 for food poisoning, II:1356 for gastroenteritis, III:1409–1410 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for urethritis, V:3441 Lactobacillus bifidus for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239–240 for diarrhea, II:1067 for urethritis, V:3441 Lactobacillus bulgaricus, II:1356 3808 Lactose in carbohydrates, II:649 diarrhea from, II:1066 Lactose intolerance, II:649–651, III:1945–1947 from celiac disease, II:682 diarrhea from, I:264 from E. coli infections, II:1237 vs. IBS, III:1866, 1867 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 from obesity surgery, IV:2380 Lactose tolerance test, III:1945 Lactulose, III:1964 for constipation, II:906 for IBS, III:1867 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 Ladies’ thimble. See Foxglove Lady-finger. See Foxglove Lady’s foxglove. See Mullein Lady’s mantle for menopause, III:2162 for menorrhagia, III:2172 Lady’s thistle. See Milk thistle Laennec’s cirrhosis. See Liver cirrhosis Laetrile. See Amygdalin Lamaze method, II:761 Lamb’s quarters, I:111 Lamellar ichthyosis, IV:3078 Lamellar keratoplasty. See Corneal transplantation Laminaria, I:7 Laminectomy, for herniated disk, III:1629 Lamisil. See Terbinafine Lamivudine for AIDS, I:80, 303 resistance to, I:86 Lamotrigine for bipolar disorder, I:488 for mania, III:2113 Lance-leaf plantain. See Plantain Lancefield Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci. See Streptococcus pyogenes Landouzy-Dejerine condition. See Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy Landsteiner, Karl, I:531 Langerhans cell histiocytosis. See Histiocytosis X Langerhans cells, III:1638, IV:2471 Language, in personal testing, III:2198, 2285 Language disorders auditory integration training for, I:417 with autism, I:418 from child abuse, II:754–755 from dementia, II:1025 from encephalitis, II:1179 from heavy metal poisoning, III:1560 vs. learning disorders, III:1969 with mental retardation, III:2173 from progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 vs. Speech disorders, IV:3121 from stroke, IV:3197 Laniazid. See Isoniazid Lanolin for corns, II:924 for hemorrhoids, I:275 Lanoxin. See Digoxin Lansoprazole for gastrinomas, III:1404 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for stomach ulcers, I:308 Lanugo hair, I:212 Laparoscopic adrenalectomy, I:63 Laparoscopic cholecystectomy, II:777, III:1385–1386, 1947, 1948 for cholecystitis, II:780 for gallstones, III:1388 Laparoscopic cystectomy, IV:2446 Laparoscopic gastrectomy, III:1397–1398 Laparoscopic laparotomy, IV:2579 Laparoscopic nephrectomy, III:1919–1920, IV:2332, 2333 Laparoscopy, III:1947–1950, 1948 for abdominal hernias, III:1624 of the adrenal gland (See Adrenalectomy) as ambulatory surgery, III:1426 appendectomy, I:338 for appendicitis, I:342 for bile duct cancer, I:478 for cervical cancer, II:714 for ectopic pregnancy, II:1132 for endometrial cancer, II:1191 for endometriosis, II:1193 for esophageal cancer, II:1240 for heartburn, III:1554 for infertility, III:1828, 1832 after liver biopsy, III:2018 for liver cancer, III:2020 for menstrual disorders, III:2170–2171 for myomectomy, III:2293 for ovarian cancer, IV:2441 for ovarian torsion, IV:2448 for PCOS, IV:2656 for PID, IV:2523 for salpingectomy, IV:2938 with salpingo-oophorectomy, IV:2938 with splenectomy, IV:3139 for splenic trauma, IV:3141–3142 for stomach cancer, IV:3165–3166 in tubal ligation, V:3397 ulcer surgery as, V:3428 for vaginal pain, V:3469 for in vitro fertilization, III:1809 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Laryngotracheobronchitis. See Croup Larynx, III:1950 damage to laryngectomy for, III:1954 laryngoscopy for, III:1958 from lung biopsy, III:2042 in drowning and near drowning, IV:2327 in epiglottitis, II:1220 in head and neck cancer (See Laryngeal cancer) in laryngitis, III:1957 laryngoscopy of, III:1958 lesions, from leishmaniasis, III:1975 removal of, III:1954–1955 spasm of, III:2222 stridor and, IV:3194 Laser ablation for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1203 for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 Laser angiography, III:1534 Laser angioplasty for atherosclerosis, I:396 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for ischemia, III:1870 Laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis, III:2299–2300, IV:2586–2589 See also Radial keratotomy Laser cyclophotocoagulation. See Photocoagulation Laser-Doppler flowmetry, I:159 Laser excision surgery for head and neck cancer, III:1517 for keloids, III:1903 Laser laparoscopic cholecystectomy. See Laparoscopic cholecystectomy Laser microsurgery, I:572 Laser peripheral iridotomy. See Iridotomy Laser photocoagulation. See Photocoagulation Laser resurfacing, IV:3080, 3081 Laser surgery, I:495, 496, III:1959–1963, 1961 for anal warts, I:172 for angiomas, I:495, 496 arthroscopic, I:363 for astigmatism, I:386 for Bartholin’s gland cyst, I:450 for cervical cancer, II:713, IV:2487 with cervical conization, II:717 for cervicitis, II:723 with cholecystectomy, II:777 with colposcopy, II:865 for detached retina, IV:2877 of the ear, II:1122 with EGD, II:1246 for endometriosis, II:1194 for genital warts, III:1445 for glaucoma, III:1459–1460 for herniated disk, III:1630 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for hyperopia, III:1712 for hyperpigmentation, III:1715 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for keratitis, III:1905 for macular degeneration, III:2076 for penile cancer, IV:2530 for retinal vein occlusion, IV:2879 for retinopathy, IV:2891 for rosacea, IV:2918 for skin cancer, IV:3067 for skin lesions, IV:3072, 3073, 3076 for snoring, IV:3112 in stapedectomy, IV:3154–3155 for warts, V:3549 LASIK. See Laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis Lasix. See Furosemide Lassa fever, III:1591 Late deceleration, electronic fetal monitoring for, II:1162 Late hypertension. See Hypertension Late-onset Alzheimer’s disease. See Alzheimer’s disease Late-stage AIDS, I:76–78 Late-term abortion. See Abortion, partial birth Latent syphilis. See Syphilis Lateral aneurysm, II:697–700 Lateral epicondylitis. See Tennis elbow Lateral humeral epicondylitis. See Tennis elbow Lateral x-ray. See Chest x-ray Latex anaphylaxis from, I:179 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234 Latex agglutination tests. See Latex fixation tests Latex fixation tests for E. coli, II:1236 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 Latissimus dorsi flap. See Surgical flaps LATS. See Long-acting thyroid stimulator test LATS tests. See Long-acting thyroid stimulator test Laughing gas. See Nitrous oxide Laughter, stress urinary incontinence from, III:2123, V:3454 Laurence-Moon-Biedl syndrome, IV:2661 Lavandula officinalis. See Lavender Lavender for alcoholism, I:98 in aromatherapy, I:349 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for dizziness, II:1096 for emphysema, II:1175 for furunculosis, I:538 for insomnia, III:1845 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 3809 Lavender Laparotomy for appendicitis, I:342 for cholecystitis, II:780 for cholestasis, II:785 for ectopic pregnancy, II:1132–1133 for endometrial cancer, II:1191 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645–1646 vs. laparoscopy, III:1947 after liver biopsy, III:2018 for peritonitis, IV:2556–2557 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2579 Large core needle biopsy of the breast, I:575 for thyroid biopsy, V:3305 Large intestine colonoscopy of, II:856 colostomy of, II:861–864 E. coli in, II:1354 in ulcerative colitis, V:3429 Large intestines surgery. See Colostomy Large-volume paracentesis. See Paracentesis Lariam. See Mefloquine Larkspur poisoning, IV:2644 Larodopa. See Levodopa Laron’s dwarfism, III:1488 Laryngeal cancer, III:1515–1519, III:1950–1954 laryngectomy for, III:1954–1956 laryngoscopy for, III:1958 speech disorders from, IV:3122–3125 Laryngeal diphtheria, II:1077 Laryngeal nerves in mediastinoscopy, III:2145 in parathyroidectomy, IV:2498 in thyroidectomy, V:3317 Laryngeal papillomatosis interferons for, III:1792 in newborns, IV:3020 Laryngectomee. See Laryngectomy Laryngectomy, III:1954–1957, 1955 for head and neck cancer, III:1518 for laryngeal cancer, III:1952 speech disorders with, IV:3124 Laryngitis, III:1957, 1957–1958 from gastroesophageal reflux, III:1553 hiccups from, III:1632 with measles, III:2139 from Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3063 vs. vocal cord nodules and polyps, V:3529 Laryngoscopy, III:1958–1959 for cough, II:942 for head and neck cancer, III:1516 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for laryngeal cancer, III:1951 for laryngitis, III:1957 for vocal cord paralysis, V:3530 Laryngospasm, II:1220 Laryngotracheitis. See Croup Lavender for laryngitis, III:1958 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for sore throats, IV:3119 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for strep throat, IV:3179 Law of Similars, homeopathy and, III:1663 Law of the Infinitesimal Dose, III:1664 Lawn chamomile. See Chamomile Laxatives, III:1963–1965 bulimia and, I:612 with colonoscopy, II:858 for constipation, I:565, II:906 dependency on, II:905 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 with gallbladder x-rays, III:1382 after hernia repair, III:1627 hyperphosphatemia from, IV:2585, 2586 hypokalemia from, III:1740 for intravenous urography, III:1855 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 magnesium poisoning from, III:2079 with malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 metabolic alkalosis from, III:2180 phosphate toxicity from, III:2194 rectal prolapse from, IV:2835 for retrograde cystography, IV:2892 for retrograde ureteropyelography, IV:2893 stool fats and, IV:3173 with tetracyclines, V:3268 with upper GI series, V:3439 for weight loss, IV:2377 Lazy eye. See Amblyopia; Strabismus LCH. See Histiocytosis X LCM. See Lymphocytic choriomeningitis LDH. See Lactate dehydrogenase LDL cholesterol, II:786–788 atherosclerosis from, I:394, 396, 397 cholesterol-reducing agents for, II:789–791 with coronary heart disease, II:932 in hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706–1707 in hypolipoproteinemia, III:1741 lipoproteins test for, III:2007–2008 tests for, II:792 LE prep test, IV:3233 Lead brain tumors from, I:569 with kidney cancer, III:1909 lung diseases from, III:2050 miscarriage from, III:2204 paresthesia from, IV:2365 3810 poisoning from (See Lead poisoning) sources of, III:1965–1966 Lead poisoning, III:1560–1561, III:1965–1968, 1966f anosmia from, IV:3099 chelation theraphy for, II:738 constipation from, II:906 delirium from, II:1021 kidney damage from, IV:2337 mental retardation from, III:2175 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2550, 2553 sideroblastic anemia from, IV:3048 Learning disabilities. See Learning disorders Learning disorders, III:1968–1970 from ADHD, I:413 in children, II:762, 765 conduct disorder from, II:883, 884 culture-fair test for, II:969 dyslexia, II:1114–1116 from lead poisoning, III:1966 with muscular dystrophy, III:2263–2264 vs. mutism, III:2272 neuropsychological tests for, IV:2763 from nicotine, II:883 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 from PTSD, IV:2686 from radiation therapy, I:574 from sensory integration disorder, IV:3002 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 Stanford-Binet intelligence scale and, IV:3153 from Tourette syndrome, V:3343 Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy, IV:2398 LeBoyer method, II:761 The Leech Book of Bald, III:1617 Leeches, III:1970–1972, 1971 LEEP. See Cone biopsy Leflunamide, for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Left bundle branch block, I:614 Left heart ventricle cardiac blood pool scan for, II:654 pulmonary edema and, IV:2778 Leg abnormalities of from holoprosencephaly, II:890 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 in achondroplasia, I:22 amputation of from diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for meningococcemia, III:2158 blood clots in, II:1013 bowed, from achondroplasia, I:22 burns of, I:617 in cervical spondylosis, II:720 congenital amputation of, II:887 cramps, I:519 edema of, II:1134 from congestive cardiomyopathy, II:896 from heart failure, III:1538 from stasis dermatitis, II:1037 elephantiasis of, II:1166 embolism of, I:355 endarterectomy of, II:1180 erysipelas of, II:1225 exercise, II:659 fractures of, IV:2780 impedance phlebography for, III:1800 infections, II:1134 ischemic, V:3496 length of, I:615 muscle spasms and cramps of, III:2261 in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 pain from herniated disk, III:1628 with low back pain, III:2031–2032, 2033 from sciatica, IV:2963 from spinal stenosis, IV:3136, 3137 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 physical examination of, IV:2594 pulmonary embolism in, IV:2780 tumors from Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 from yaws, V:3589 varicose veins in, V:3476 weakness of, V:3395 Leg injuries, III:1800 Leg surgery, I:190 Leg ulcer from hypercoagulation, III:1701 from mycobacterial infections, III:2277 Leg veins in coronary artery bypass grafting, II:925, 927 in fainting, II:1280 Legg-Calve-Perthes disease, IV:2415 Legionella, III:1972–1974, III:1973 Legionella pneumophila, IV:2639, 3149, 3150 Legionellosis. See Legionnaires’ disease Legionnaires’ disease, III:1972–1974, 1973 erythromycins for, II:1232 as pneumonia, IV:2639 Leiner’s disease. See Seborrheic dermatitis Leiomyoma. See Fibroid tumors Leiomyomas. See Uterine fibroids Leiomyosarcomas, III:1397 Leishmania, III:1975 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, III:1982–1984 gene therapy for, III:1420 kidney stones from, III:1917 Lescol. See Fluvastatin Lesionectomy, for seizures, IV:2988 Lesions with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:975 laser surgery for, III:1959 from leishmaniasis, III:1975 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 from psoriasis, IV:2755 from riboflavin deficiency, IV:2906 Let-down reflex, in lactation, III:1942 Letterer-Siwe disease, III:1638–1639 Leucine, urinalysis for, V:3446 Leucovorin, for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 Leucovorin, for rectal cancer, IV:2831 Leukapheresis, stem cells and, III:1647 Leukemia, II:631, 632, 633, 636 acute (See Acute leukemia) ataxia-telangiectasia and, I:388 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 blood transfusions for, V:3368 bone marrow aspiration for, I:549 bruises from, I:608 in children, II:762 chronic (See Chronic leukemia) coccidioidomycosis with, II:834 color blindness from, II:860 complete blood count for, I:521 with Down syndrome, II:1099, 1100 fetal hemoglobin test and, II:1313 graft vs. host disease with, III:1481, 1482 hairy cell (See Hairy cell leukemia) with heart biopsy, III:2287 histoplasmosis with, III:1640 with Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1789 itching from, III:1874 jaundice from, III:1882 after kidney transplantation, III:2030 laboratory tests for, III:1985–1986 lactic acid test for, III:1945 leukocytosis from, III:1993 lymphocyte tests for, III:2068 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 MRI for, III:2082 with mucormycosis, III:2232 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 neutropenia from, IV:2353 platelet aggregation test for, IV:2624 platelet count for, IV:2624 priapism from, IV:2715 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 from radiation injuries, IV:2808 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2935 sideroblastic anemia with, IV:3048 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 sporotrichosis and, IV:3143 stomatitis with, IV:3170 thrombocytopenia with, II:827–828 uric acid tests for, V:3442 with warm antibody hemolytic anemia, I:181 WBC count and differential for, V:3556, 3557 See also Cancer Leukemia stains, III:1985–1986 Leukemic reticuloendotheliosis. See Hairy cell leukemia Leukine. See Sargramostim Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndrome, II:874 Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase stain for leukemia, III:1985 for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 Leukocytes. See White blood cells Leukocytic nonspecific esterase stain, III:1985 Leukocytic specific esterase stain, III:1985 Leukocytosis, III:1993–1993, III:2039 Leukoderma, V:3527 Leukodystrophies, IV:2560 Leukoerythroblastosis. See Myelofibrosis Leukopenia with SCID, IV:3009 WBC count and differential for, V:3557 Leukotriene modifiers for allergies, I:121 for asthma, I:382 Leukotrienes, in asthma, I:380 Leuprolide with myomectomy, III:2293 for precocious puberty, IV:2691 Leurocristine. See Vincristine Levamisole, for Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 Levamisole, for rectal cancer, IV:2831 Levaquin. See Levofloxacin Leventhal, John M., II:754 Levocardia, situs inversus and, IV:3060 Levodopa ammonia levels from, III:2024 with bupropion, IV:3111 cortisol test with, II:937 delirium from, II:1021 jaundice from, III:1881 for manganese toxicity, III:2195 for movement disorders, III:2223 for Parkinson disease, I:233, 295–297 prolactin test and, IV:2723 for PSP, IV:2722 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 for torticollis, V:3341 for tremor, V:3381 3811 Levodopa Leishmaniasis, III:1975–1977, 1976 cutaneous (See Cutaneous leishmaniasis) diffuse cutaneous (See Diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis) elephantiasis from, II:1166 mucocutaneous (See Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis) visceral (See Visceral leishmaniasis) Lejeune, Jerome, II:954 Lemon balm for cold sores, II:846 for colic, II:848 for indigestion, III:1814 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for nausea, IV:2326 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for shingles, IV:3032 Lemon juice, for bladder stones, I:511 Lemon oil for influenza, III:1835 for RSV, IV:2869 Lens (Eye). See Crystalline lens Lens coatings, for eyeglasses, II:1266 Lens curvature. See Astigmatism Lens opacities. See Cataract Lens replacement, II:1258 Lensometer, II:1263 Lente insulin, for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 Lentigo maligna melanoma, III:2095, 2210 See also Nevus Leonine facies, III:1978 Leopardsbane. See Arnica Lepirudin, I:250 Lepra reactions, III:1979 Lepromatous leprosy, III:1978 Leprostatic agents, III:1979 Leprosy, III:1977–1980, 1979 ACE test for, I:205 with amyloidosis, I:161 erythema nodosum from, II:1227 keratitis from, III:1905 vs. leishmaniasis, III:1975 vs. mycobacterial infections, III:2276 paresthesia from, IV:2365 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2549, 2550, 2552, 2553 protein components test for, IV:2746 visual impairment from, V:3510 Leptospira interrogans, III:1980–1982 Leptospirosis, III:1980–1982 Leptotrombidium akamushi, IV:2975 Leptotrombidium deliense, IV:2975 Leptotrombidium pallidum, IV:2975 Leptotrombidium scutellare, IV:2975 LES. See Lower esophageal sphincter Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community, III:1414–1417 Lesch, Michael, III:1983 Levodopa uric acid tests and, V:3442 Levofloxacin, for bacterial infections, II:1344 Levothroid. See Levothyroxine Levothyroxine, V:3313, 3320 Levothyroxine sodium, III:1757 Levoxyl. See Levothyroxine Levsin. See Hyoscyamine Lewy body disease. See Parkinson disease LFTs. See Liver function tests LGBT community. See Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender community LGMD. See Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy LH. See Luteinizing hormone Libido female sexual arousal disorder and, II:1308 in hypogonadism, III:1738 sildenafil citrate for, IV:3052 with testosterone replacement therapy, III:2162 Librium. See Chlordiazepoxide Lice infestations, III:1994–1998, 1995, 1996 blepharitis from, II:1271 vs. enterobiasis, II:1208 itching from, III:1874 trench fever from, V:3384 Licensing. See Certification and licensing Lichen planus, III:1996–1998, 1997 itching from, III:1874 papule and plaques from, IV:3074 Lichen simplex itching from, III:1874 from photosensitivity, IV:2589 Lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998–1999, IV:3078 Lichenification, IV:3075 Licorice with aldosterone test, I:101 for anemia, I:184 for cold sores, II:846 for genital herpes, III:1443 for heartburn, III:1555 hypokalemia from, III:1740 for laryngitis, III:1957 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 with plasma renin activity, IV:2617 for PMS, IV:2711 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for shingles, IV:3032 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 Licorice ingestion syndrome, IV:2618 Liddle’s syndrome, III:1740 Lidocaine for epididymitis, II:1219 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hemorrhoids, I:275 3812 for local anesthesia, I:190 methemoglobinemia from, III:2183–2184 with skin biopsy, IV:3065 with synovial fluid analysis, III:1889 Life change events conversion disorder from, IV:3114 mood disorders from, III:2216 sleep disorders from, IV:3087 Life support, II:1006, III:1999–2002 Lifestyle changes for atherosclerosis, I:396 for cancer prevention, III:2200 in cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 in conversion disorder, IV:3117 COPD and, II:811 for coronary heart disease, II:931, 934 from cystectomy, II:983 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 with embolism, I:355 with endarterectomy, II:1180, 1182 for fatigue, II:1295–1296 for heart attack prevention, III:1535–1536, 2200 for heart failure, III:1540 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 with herniated disk, III:1631 for high cholesterol, II:789 with high cholesterol, II:794 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 for hypertension, III:1722 insomnia and, III:1843, 1845 for low back pain, III:2033, 2034 with mastectomy, III:2130 for men’s health, III:2165 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for pain management, IV:2460–2461 physical examination and, IV:2593 postpartum depression and, IV:2681 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 prepregnancy counseling and, IV:2712 with renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 for sleep disorders, IV:3091 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for STD prevention, IV:3022–3023 for substance abuse, IV:3211 syphilis and, IV:3226, 3230 for tension headache prevention, V:3256 with TIA, V:3373 for tinnitus, V:3323 Lifting hernias from, III:1623 herniated disk from, III:1628 low back pain from, III:2032, 2034 after lumpectomy, III:2037 with osteoarthritis, IV:2414 with sciatica, IV:2965 Liga, lead poisoning from, III:1965 Ligament injuries arthrography for, I:359 from dislocations and subluxations, II:1083 foot care with, II:1357 immobilization and, III:1780 sports-related, IV:3145 sprains (See Sprains and strains) Ligaments in arthroplasty, I:361 arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 arthroscopy for, I:364 in bunionectomy, I:616 in congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 in contracture, II:913 in juvenile arthritis, III:1892 in manipulation, IV:2421 MRI imaging of, III:2082 in rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 surgery of, IV:2409–2410 weak, rectal prolapse from, IV:2835 Ligation clip for aneurysm, IV:3203 for cerebral aneurysm, II:700 rubber band, III:1594 Light in cataract surgery, II:671 flashing, as migraine trigger, III:2188 infrared (See Infrared light) for jaundice, III:1464 for neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 ultraviolet (See Ultraviolet light) Light boxes for phototherapy, IV:2590–2591, 2979 for ultraviolet light treatment, V:3436 Light chain disease, I:464 Light coagulation. See Photocoagulation Light sensitivity. See Photosensitivity disorders Light therapy. See Phototherapy Lightning, injuries from, II:1143 Lignac-de Toni-Debre-Fanconi syndrome. See Fanconi’s syndrome Lignac’s syndrome. See Fanconi’s syndrome Ligusticum. See Osha root Ligusticum porteri. See Osha root Like cures like, II:686–687 Lily-of-the-valley poisoning, IV:2644 Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267, 2295 Limb-salvage surgery, IV:2944 Limbic system, II:1023 Limited Wegener’s disease. See Wegener’s granulomatosis LINAC radiosurgery. See Radiosurgery GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Liposomal amphotericin B, I:376 Liposomal anthracyclines, III:1899 Liposomal daunorubicin, III:1899 Liposomal doxorubicin, III:1899 Liposomes, I:573 Liposuction, III:2009–2012, 2011f IV:2621 breast reduction with, I:590 for obesity, IV:2376 Liquid diet for endorectal ultrasonography, II:1195 for food poisoning, II:1355 with jaw fixation, III:1885, 2136 for obesity, IV:2376 with obesity surgery, IV:2380 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for vagotomy patients, V:3470 Liquid nitrogen for genital warts, III:1445 for non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3067 for warts, V:3549 Lisinopril for heart attack, I:203 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypertension, I:203 Lissencephaly, II:890, 891 Listeria monocytogenes gastroenteritis from, III:1408 listeriosis from, III:2012–2014 newborn meningitis from, III:2154 Listeriosis, III:2012–2014 Lithane. See Lithium Lithium with ACE inhibitors, I:205 for bipolar disorder, I:487 for borderline disorder, IV:2566 with breastfeeding, III:1942 for conduct disorder, II:884 congenital heart disease and, II:900 cortisol test with, II:937 delirium from, II:1021 diabetes insipidus from, II:1047 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 with diuretics, II:1090, 1102 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 hypothyroidism from, III:1756 leukocytosis from, III:1993 for mania, III:2113 with myasthenia gravis, III:2275 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 for paraphilias, IV:3019 parathyroid hormone test and, IV:2495 polyhydramnios and, IV:2664 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2980 thyroxine levels and, V:3310 tremor from, V:3381 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Lithium carbonate for anorexia nervosa, I:213 as antipsychotic, I:300, 301 for cluster headache, II:825 for mood disorders, III:2217 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2980 Lithium succinate, for genital herpes, III:1443 Lithobid. See Lithium Lithonate. See Lithium Lithotabs. See Lithium Lithotripsy, III:2014–2016, 2015 for cholangitis, II:776 for gallstones, III:1386, 1390 for kidney stones, II:991, III:1918 for medullary sponge kidney, III:2149, 2150 Live cell therapy. See Cell therapy Liver abscess of, I:14, 15, 144, 145, II:1128, III:2017 acid phosphatase in, I:23 with aging, I:69 amylase in, I:160 aspartate aminotransferase in, I:374 blood clots, III:1701 CAT scan of, II:877 cirrhosis (See Liver cirrhosis) cysts, II:1127 damage to from acetaminophen, I:19 alanine aminotransferase test for, I:87–88 from anticonvulsants, I:253 from antiretroviral drugs, I:304 with antituberculosis drugs, I:312, 313 from aspirin, I:378 from CPR, II:664–665 from dantrolene, III:2259, 2260 from dengue fever, II:1028 from drug interactions, III:1670 from drug overdose, II:1105 from drugs, III:1607 from echinococcosis, II:1127–1128 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 from graft vs. host disease, III:1481 from hepatitis B, IV:2541 from HMG-CoA inhibitors, II:791 from iron toxicity, III:2194 from nicotinic acid, III:1708 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 from sulfonamides, IV:3216 from Tacrine, IV:3000 urinalysis for, V:3446 detoxification of, II:1042 diseases (See Liver diseases) drug metabolism and, II:1102 enlarged 3813 Liver Lincomycin, I:241 Lincosamindes, I:241 Lindane for lice, III:1995, 1996 for scabies, IV:2950 Linden, for anemia, I:184 Lindesmith Center-Drug Policy Foundation, II:832 Linear accelerator radiosurgery. See Radiosurgery Linear fractures. See Fracture lines Linium usitatissimus. See Flaxseed Linkage (Genetics), I:131 alpha-Linoleic acid for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 Linoleic acid, for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 Linseed. See Flaxseed Lion’s mouth. See Foxglove Lion’s tooth. See Dandelion Lioresal. See Baclofen Lip with genital herpes, III:1441 injuries to, III:2137 Lip balm, IV:3220 Lip cancer, III:1515–1519 Lip reading, II:839 Lipase, IV:3173 Lipase test, III:2002–2003 Lipectomy. See Liposuction Lipid metabolism disorders, II:794 Lipid pneumonia, III:2066 Lipid profile test, II:792–794 Lipidoses. See Lipoidosis Lipids, II:930, III:1741 in cholestasis, II:783 in cholesterol, II:792 in coronary heart disease, II:930 lipase and, III:2002 lipoidosis and, III:2003 in lipoproteins test, III:2007 tests for, V:3393 Lipitor. See Atorvastatin Lipoidosis, III:2003–2006 Lipoma nodule from, IV:3075 parotid cancer from, IV:2504 Lipoplasty. See Liposuction Lipoprotein(a), III:2007 Lipoproteins in atherosclerosis, I:394 in high cholesterol, II:789 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706–1707 in hypolipoproteinemia, III:1741 intermediate-density (See Intermediate-density lipoprotein) Lipoproteins test, II:792, III:2006–2009 Liposhaving, III:2009, III:2009, 2010, 2011 Liver from acute leukemia, III:1987 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 from Gaucher’s disease, III:2004 from hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 from hemolytic anemia, III:1579 from hepatitis A, III:1596 from hepatitis B, III:1601 from hepatitis D, III:1605 from hepatitis E, III:1608 from histiocytosis, III:1639 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from leishmaniasis, III:1976 liver biopsy for, III:2017 from myelofibrosis, III:2282 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004 from NRTIs, I:304 from peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 polycythemia vera and, IV:2658 from sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 from TORCH syndrome, V:3338 from tricuspid valve insufficiency, V:3389 from Wolman disease, III:2005 in fat processing, III:1741 fatty (See Fatty liver) lactate dehydrogenase in, III:1939, 1941 in malaria, III:2088 in mastocytosis, III:2132 nodules, from sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 PTHC for, IV:2532–2533 punctured from kidney biopsy, III:1908 from transhepatic biliary catheterization, V:3370 rupture of, from eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2693 situs inversus of, IV:3060 vitamin B6 in, V:3513 Liver biopsy, III:2016–2018, 2017 for autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 for Budd-Chiari syndrome, I:610 for cholestasis, II:785 for fatty liver, II:1299 for fructose intolerance, III:1621 hemochromatosis and, III:1573 for jaundice, III:1883 for liver cancer, III:2020 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 for primary biliary cirrhosis, IV:2717 for Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 Liver cancer, III:2018–2022 alpha fetoprotein from, I:127, 128 biopsy for (See Liver biopsy) brain tumor with, I:574 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 3814 from choriocarcinomas, II:798 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 from hemochromatosis, III:1573 from hepatitis B, III:1601 from hepatitis C, III:1603 from kidney cancer, III:1910 laparoscopy for, III:1947 liver transplantation for, III:2028–2029 lymphomas from, III:2093 mixed cell, III:2019 radionuclide imaging for, III:2027–2028 Liver cirrhosis, II:814–818 abdominal fluid from, IV:2489 from alcoholic hepatitis, III:1598 with aldosteronism, I:101 ascites from, I:371–372, 373 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 biliary (See Biliary cirrhosis) bleeding varices from, I:516, 517 CAT scan for, II:877 causes of, II:815 celiac and mesenteric angiography for, I:198 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 drug metabolism with, II:1102 gynecomastia from, III:1497 with hemoglobin test, III:1577 from hepatitis B, III:1600, IV:2541 from hepatitis C, III:1603 from hepatitis D, III:1605 jaundice from, III:1883, IV:2330 laparoscopy for, III:1949 liver biopsy for, III:2017 liver cancer from, III:2019, 2022 with overhydration, IV:2449 pellagra from, IV:2515 pigment, II:815 plasma renin activity for, IV:2618 pleural effusion from, IV:2628 pleurisy from, IV:2631 portal vein bypass and, IV:2676 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 PTHC for, IV:2533 radionuclide imaging for, III:2027, 2028 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2935 sex hormone tests for, IV:3014 splenectomy for, IV:3138 tests for, III:2026–2027 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 tube compression for, V:3399 ultrasonography for, I:1, 5 with vibriosis, V:3506 zinc deficiency from, III:2190 Liver diseases abdominal fluid from, IV:2489 with ACE inhibitors, I:204 with acetaminophen, I:19 acidosis from, III:2179 alcoholic (See Alcoholic liver diseases) alkaline phosphatase and, I:106, 107 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127, 128 with alpha1-adrenergic blockers, I:129 amylase tests for, I:160 anemia from, I:181 with anti-insomnia agents, I:284 with antiangina agents, I:230 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 with anticancer agents, I:248 with antidiarrhea drugs, I:265 with antihelminthic drugs, I:275 with antihistamines, I:278 with antimalarials, I:287 with antimigraine agents, I:290 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 with antirheumatic drugs, I:306 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311, 312 ascites from, I:371–372, 373 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:373–374 with aspirin, I:378 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:302 bad breath from, I:437 with barbiturates, I:446 with benzodiazepines, I:232, 467 beriberi and, I:469 biopsy for, III:2017–2018 bleeding varices from, I:515–517 blood glucose tests for, I:529 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 bruises from, I:608 caffeine with, II:626 calcium channel blockers with, II:628 Campylobacter and, II:630 with cephalosporins, II:694 with chemotherapy, III:1647 cholestasis from, II:783 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 cirrhosis from, II:816 with cisapride, I:272 with colony stimulating factors, II:643 color blindness, II:859 with complement deficiencies, II:874 with cough suppressants, II:944 Depo-Provera with, II:1031, 1032 with dicyclomine, I:309 with digitalis, II:1074 diuretics and, II:1088, 1089 drug metabolism with, II:1102, 1103–1104 dyspepsia from, II:1118 edema from, II:1134 endoscopic sphincterotomy for, II:1198 enteral nutrition for, V:3400 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 normocytic anemia from, IV:2839 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with ondansetron, II:643 with opioid analgesics, I:177 with osteoarthritis, IV:2412 with partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 from pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 PT test for, IV:2749 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 radionuclide imaging for, III:2027–2028 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 spider angiomas with, I:494 SSRIs with, IV:2992 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 from sulfonamides, IV:3216 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:268 tests for (See Liver function tests) with tetracyclines, V:3267 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 triiodothyronine levels and, V:3312 from typhoid, V:3421 from typhus, V:3423 ultrasonography for, I:2 urinalysis for, V:3446 with ventricular assist devices, V:3497 Wilson disease and, V:3566–3567 Liver encephalopathy, III:2022–2024 liver function tests for, III:2025, 2027 from sclerotherapy, IV:2970 tremor from, V:3381 Liver enzymes in drug metabolism, II:1102 for hepatitis C diagnosis, III:1604 with peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 in Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 See also Alanine aminotransferase; Aspartate aminotransferase Liver failure acidosis from, III:2179 acute kidney failure from, I:44 anemia from, I:181 from autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 from biliary atresia, I:479 from drug overdose, II:1104, 1106 enteral nutrition for, V:3400 from falciparum malaria, III:2089 from fatty liver, II:1298 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 from graft vs. host disease, III:1481 from hepatitis A, III:1596 from hepatitis C, III:1603, 1604 from hepatitis E, III:1608 from hepatitis G, III:1609 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from hypothermia, III:1754 liver encephalopathy from, III:2022 liver transplantation for, III:2028–2030 from mushroom poisoning, III:2267 peripheral neuropathy and, IV:2551 from thyroid crisis, III:1725 from toxic shock syndrome, V:3347 urinalysis for, V:3446 from viral hepatitis, III:1611 Liver flukes bile duct cancer from, I:477 infections from, II:1342 Liver function, III:2028 in cholecystitis, II:779 in jaundice, III:1880–1881, 1882 lactic acid and, III:1944 with lipoproteins, III:2007 with lymphomas, III:2092 in neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 RMSF and, IV:2910 in temporal arteritis, V:3248 Liver function tests, I:87–88, III:2024–2027 bone marrow transplantation and, I:554 for breast cancer, I:580 for cholangitis, II:775 for cholestasis, II:785 for colon cancer, II:851 for hypersplenism, III:1719 with liver biopsy, III:2017 for liver cancer, III:2019, 2020 for melioidosis, III:2151 with neurologic examination, IV:2352 for portal vein bypass, IV:2676 before radial neck dissection, IV:2814 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 for Wilm’s tumor, V:3565 Liver nuclear medicine scan. See Liver scan Liver phosphorylase activating-deactivating cascade, III:1467 Liver phosphorylase deficiency, III:1466–1467 Liver scan, II:779, III:2027–2028 Liver surgery, III:1883 Liver transplantation, III:2028–2030, 2029, 2030t for alcoholic hepatitis, III:1598 for autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 for biliary atresia, I:480 for Budd-Chiari syndrome, I:610 with cholangitis, II:776 for cholestasis, II:785 after drug overdose, II:1106 for fatty liver, II:1299 for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 for hepatitis C, III:1604 3815 Liver transplantation with erythromycins, II:1232 esophageal varices from, IV:2969 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 from fluke infection, II:1343 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 gallium scan for, III:1384 from gonorrhea, III:1474 gynecomastia from, III:1497 haptoglobin test for, III:1510 with heart transplantation, III:1545 hematocrit test for, III:1572 from hemochromatosis, III:1573 from hemolytic anemia, III:1579 vs. hemoptysis, III:1589 with hepatitis A, III:1597 from hepatitis B, IV:2541 from hepatitis C, III:1603 from hepatitis D, III:1606 high cholesterol and, II:789, 790 from histoplasmosis, III:1640 with hormone replacement therapy, III:2160 hypercholesterolemia from, III:1699 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1707 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 hypogonadism from, III:1738 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1793 from infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 with infertility drugs, III:1831 insulin-like growth factor I for, III:1488 iron tests for, III:1863 itching from, III:1874 jaundice from, III:1883 with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1939, 1940, 1941 lactic acid test for, III:1944–1945 from laxatives, III:1964 from leptospirosis, III:1981 liver encephalopathy from, III:2022–2024 liver function tests for, III:2024–2027 with loperamide, I:265 with low cholesterol, II:794 lung abscess from, III:2039 with lung transplantation, III:2054 with lymphography, III:2066 with macrolides, I:242 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 with measles, III:2139 in men, III:2165 menorrhagia from, II:1112 with methadone, III:2182 with methenamine, V:3448 with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 with nalidixic acid, V:3448 Liver transplantation for hepatitis D, III:1606 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795, 1796 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 for liver cancer, III:2021 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 for porphyria, IV:2674–2675 for primary biliary cirrhosis, IV:2718 splenoportography for, I:199 for viral hepatitis, III:1611 Liver tumors endoscopic sphincterotomy for, II:1198 with liver biopsy, III:2017 radionuclide imaging for, III:2027–2028 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 tests for, III:2025, 2027 Livestock anthrax from, I:223 St. John’s wort and, IV:3152 Living donors for kidney transplantation, III:1919, 1920–1921 for liver transplantation, III:2029 nephrectomy for, IV:2332 Living the Therapeutic Touch (Krieger), V:3283 Living will, II:1006 LL. See Lepromatous leprosy LMA. See Laban movement analysis Lo/Ovral. See Oral contraceptives Loa loa, filariasis from, II:1330 Lobar hemorrhage, II:695 Lobectomy, III:2053, 2054 for liver cancer, III:2021 for lung cancer, III:2045 Lobelia for congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 Lobotomy. See Psychosurgery Local anesthesia, I:189–193 with amniocentesis, I:154 anxiety from, I:318 for arthroscopy, I:366 for circumcision, II:814 for cluster headache, II:825 cocaine as, II:831 for electrophysiologic tests, II:1165 for endometrial biopsy, II:1186 for episiotomy, II:1222 for face lift, II:1275 for ganglion, III:1392 for hair transplantation, III:1500 for heart surgery, III:1544 with laparoscopy, III:1948 with pulmonary artery catheterization, IV:2777 for sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 for sciatica, IV:2964 3816 for skin resurfacing, IV:3080 for tooth extraction, V:3333 with urinary catheterization, V:3450 for wound repair, III:1936 Local resection, for anal cancer, I:171 Localized resectable neuroblastoma. See Neuroblastoma Lockjaw. See Tetanus Locus ceruleus, LSD and, III:2073 Lodine. See Etodolac Lodosyn. See Carbidopa Loeffler’s medium, for diphtheria, II:1078 Loestrin. See Oral contraceptives Loffler’s pneumonia. See Pulmonary eosinophilia Lomatium, for tonsillitis, V:3328 Lomefloxacin, I:242, II:1344 Lomotil. See Diphenoxylate-atropine London Pharmacopoeia (Culpeper), III:1617 Lone star tick, II:1142 Long-acting thyroid stimulator test, V:3309–3312 Long bones, in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 Long QT syndrome. See Prolonged QT syndrome Long-term group therapy. See Group therapy Long-term insomnia. See Chronic insomnia Long-term stress, III:1424–1425 Longitudinal fractures. See Fracture lines Lonicera. See Honeysuckle Lonicera japonica. See Honeysuckle Loniten. See Minoxidil Loop colostomy. See Colostomy Loop diuretics, II:1088, III:1697–1698 Loop electrosurgical excision. See Cone biopsy Loperamide for campylobacteriosis, II:631 for Crohn’s disease, II:959 for cryptosporidiosis, II:967 for cyclosporiasis, II:982 for diarrhea, I:264, II:1067 for fecal incontinence, II:1301 for IBS, III:1867 for travelers diarrhea, V:3379 Lopid. See Gemfibrozil Lopinavir, for AIDS, I:80 Lopressor. See Metoprolol Loprox. See Topical antifungal drugs Lopurin. See Allopurinol Loratadine for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:118, 277, 278 Lorazepam for alcohol withdrawal, V:3573 for anxiety, I:231–233, 466 for central nervous system depression, II:689 for motion sickness in astronauts, I:427 for sleep disorders, IV:3091 Lorenzo’s oil for adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 for X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, IV:2560, 2561 Lortab. See Hydrocodone-acetaminophen Losartan, for hypertension, I:279–281 Loss of hearing. See Hearing loss Lotensin. See Benazepril Lotrimin. See Clotrimazole; Topical antifungal drugs Lotrisone. See Betamethasone Lou Gehrig’s disease. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Loud noises, hearing loss from, III:1528 Louis-Bar syndrome. See Ataxia telangiectasia Louse-borne relapsing fever. See Relapsing fever Lovastatin for high cholesterol, II:787, 789, 790 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 Loviride, for retrovirus diseases, I:303 Low anal atresia. See Anal atresia Low back pain, III:2031–2034, 2032f acetaminophen for, I:18 from acute kidney failure, I:44 from Addison’s disease, I:54 from aortic aneurysm, I:325 chronic, III:2031 from chronic kidney failure, II:807 as chronic pain, IV:2459, 2460 from complement deficiencies, II:874 diathermy heat treatment for, III:1560 electric brain stimulation for, II:1146 from fibroids, III:1760 from herniated disk, III:1628 from kyphosis, III:1932 from miscarriage, III:2204 with multiple sclerosis, III:2253 from PMS, IV:2710 with sciatica, IV:2963 from somatoform disorders, IV:3114 from spinal stenosis, IV:3136, 3137 Low birth weight from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 from fetal growth retardation, III:1852 from genital herpes, IV:2541 from prematurity, IV:2706 from rubella, IV:2927 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Lugol’s solution, I:61 Lui, C., III:1455 Lumbar puncture for acute leukemia, III:1988 for arteriovenous malformations, I:358 for botulism, I:561 for brain tumor, I:572 for cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 cerebrospinal fluid analysis and, II:707, II:707–708 for CNS infections, II:690 for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 for cryptococcosis, II:965 for delirium, II:1022 for encephalitis, II:1178 for facial paralysis, I:462 for genital herpes, III:1442 for Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 for histoplamsosis, III:1640 for leptospirosis, III:1981–1982 for listeriosis, III:2013 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 for lymphomas, III:2093 for meningitis, III:2155–2156 with mental status examination, III:2178 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 with neurologic examination, IV:2352 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 for poliovirus, IV:2649 with prematurity, IV:2706 for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 for Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 for syphilis, IV:3229 with TORCH test, V:3339 Lumbar support, for herniated disk, III:1629 Lumbar vertebrae chemonucleolysis for, II:739 with herniated disk, III:1628 in low back pain, III:2031 rehabilitation for, IV:2846 in sciatica, IV:2964 sciatica from, IV:2964 Lumbosacral nerve roots, IV:2963 Lumbrosacral nerve roots, II:1081 Lumen, II:1092 Lumigan, for glaucoma, III:1459 Luminal. See Phenobarbital Luminal amebicides. See Amebiasis Lumpectomy, III:2036–2038 for breast cancer, I:581 for fibroadenoma, II:1322 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 vs. mastectomy, III:2128 for Paget’s disease of the breast, III:2158 Lumpy breasts. See Fibrocystic condition of the breast Lumpy jaw. See Actinomycosis Lunelle. for contraception, II:1031–1032 Lung abnormalities cyanosis from, II:979 situs inversus, IV:3060 anatomy of, III:2043, 2046 aspartate aminotransferase in, I:374 bleeding into, III:1475, 1777 blood clots in (See Pulmonary embolism) burns, from laser surgery, III:1962 collapsed (See Atelectasis) in congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 in cutaneous larvae migrans, II:974 in cutis laxa, II:978 in cyanosis, II:980 in cystic fibrosis, II:984–989 damage to (See Lung damage) diseases of (See Lung diseases) with esophageal atresia, II:1238 fetal, in premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 function of, IV:2637–2638 in Heimlich maneuver, III:1564 in hookworm disease, III:1667 lactate dehydrogenase in, III:1939, 1941 normal vs. smokers, III:2047 overinflation, from emphysema, II:1173 in pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 retinoic acid for, V:3512 scarring of (See Pulmonary fibrosis) x-rays, for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 Lung abscess, I:13, 14, 15, III:2038–2040 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from animal bite infections, I:206 with chest physical therapy, II:745 from coccidioidomycosis, II:834–835 from melioidosis, III:2150 Lung biopsy, III:2040–2043, III:2052 for aspergillosis, I:375 for cancer, III:2048 for cryptococcosis, II:965 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for lung cancer, III:2044 for lung diseases, III:2051 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 for PAP, IV:2776 3817 Lung biopsy Low blood pressure. See Hypotension Low blood sugar. See Hypoglycemia Low carbohydrate diet Atkins, I:400–402 for seizures, IV:2988 Low cholesterol diet, II:787, III:2104 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:659 for coronary heart disease, II:932 with endarterectomy, II:1182 after heart valve replacement, III:1551 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699, 1700 for Niemann-Pick disease, III:2005 for senior’s health, IV:2998 Low density lipoprotein cholesterol. See LDL cholesterol Low fat diet, II:1070, IV:2368 Low grade tumors, brain. See Brain tumors Low natural killer cell disease. See Chronic fatigue syndrome Low protein diet. See Protein-restricted diet Low salt diet. See Sodium-restricted diet Low sodium diet. See Sodium-restricted diet Low tar cigarettes, IV:3104 Low transverse incision for cesarean section, II:725 for salpingectomy, IV:2937 Low vision, V:3509 Lowe syndrome. See Oculocerebrorenal syndrome Lower esophageal ring, III:2034–2035 Lower esophageal sphincter, III:1553 Lower GI exam. See Barium enema Lower motor neuron degeneration. See Motor neurons Lower motor neurons. See motor neurons Lower urinary tract infections. See Urinary tract infections Loxapine, for psychosis, I:300, 301, 302 Loxitane. See Loxapine Lozol. See Indapamide LQTS. See Prolonged QT syndrome LSD. See Lysergic acid diethylamide Lubricants. See Lubrication Lubrication for pityriasis rosea, IV:2609 for sexual dysfunctions, II:1308, 1309, IV:3016, 3017 for urinary catheterization, V:3450 Lucerne. See Alfalfa Ludiomil. See Maprotiline Lues. See Syphilis Lufyllin. See Dyphylline Lung biopsy for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 for sarcoidosis, IV:2941 Lung cancer, II:631, 632, 633, 634, III:2043–2050, V:3576 with ACE test, I:206 from air pollution, III:2050 amylase tests for, I:160 biopsy for, III:2040–2042 brain tumor from, I:569, 574 bronchoscopy for, I:603 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 corticotropin levels and, I:65 ethnic and gender differences in, III:2199 gynecomastia from, III:1497 hemoptysis from, III:1589 with Hodgkin’s disease, III:1649 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 from kidney cancer, III:1910 liver cancer from, III:2019 liver function tests for, III:2026 metastasis of bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 mediastinoscopy for, III:2143 non-small cell (See Non-small cell lung cancer) from radiation, IV:2809 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 from sarcomas, IV:2943 small cell (See Small cell lung cancer) from smoking, III:2051, IV:3104 spinal metastasis of, III:2031 superior vena cava syndrome with, IV:3221–3222 surgery for, III:2053 thoracoscopy for, V:3290 See also Cancer Lung cysts from echinococcosis, II:1127 gas embolism and, III:1396–1397 from interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 Lung damage from ARDS, I:67–68 from asbestosis, I:370 from burns, I:617 from chemotherapy, III:1647 from CPR, II:664–665 from echinococcosis, II:1127 from emphysema, II:1173 from liver biopsy, III:2018 from malnutrition, III:2104 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004, 2006 from occupational asthma, IV:2386, 2387–2388 from pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 3818 from smoke inhalation, IV:3102 from vitamin toxicity, V:3522 Lung diseases with albinism, I:90 from ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 with anti-insomnia agents, I:283 with antirheumatic drugs, I:306 with asthma, I:383 atelectasis from, I:390 atrial ectopic beats from, I:406 atrial fibrillation from, I:407 black, I:505–506 blood clots (See Pulmonary embolism) bronchodilators for, I:600 bronchoscopy for, I:603–605 CAT scan for, II:878 from chemical exposure, III:2050–2051 chest physical therapy for, II:745 chest x-ray for, II:747 choking from, II:772 with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 COPD and, II:809 cor pulmonale from, II:917 with cough suppressants, II:943 from cryptosporidiosis, II:967 cyanosis from, II:979 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 dehydration from, II:1017 with digitalis, II:1074 dyspnea from, IV:3035, 3036 with face lift, II:1275 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 from gas, III:2050–2051 gas embolism and, III:1396–1397 heart failure from, III:1537 with heart transplantation, III:1545 hemoglobin test for, III:1576 histoplasmosis with, III:1640 with hysterectomy, III:1762 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1793 interstitial (See Interstitial lung diseases) with joint replacement, III:1891 with kidney transplantation, III:1919 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1939, 1940 Legionnaires’ disease with, III:1972–1974 from leptospirosis, III:1981 with liver transplantation, III:2029 with low cholesterol, II:792 lung perfusion and ventilation scans for, III:2052 lung transplantation for, III:2054 with lymphography, III:2066 in men, III:2164 with methadone, III:2182 from mucormycosis, III:2232 with mycobacterial infections, III:2276–2277 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 with nitrofurantoin, V:3448 from oligohydramnios, IV:2664 oxygen therapy for, III:1838 pneumothorax from, IV:2641–2642 from prematurity, IV:2708 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 rehabilitation for, IV:2847 respiratory acidosis and, IV:2861 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 from rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2899, 2900 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 sedation with, IV:2983, 2984 sporotrichosis and, IV:3143 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 surgery for, III:2052–2054 tests for, IV:2783–2784 tricuspid valve insufficiency from, V:3389 with ventricular assist devices, V:3497 Lung fluke infections, II:1343 Lung function. See Respiratory function Lung function tests. See Respiratory function tests Lung infections biopsy for, III:2040–2042 brain abscess from, I:566 from epiglottitis, II:1220 from fluke infection, II:1343 hospital acquired, III:1674 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2013 lung transplantation for, III:2054 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 from mycobacteria, III:2277 from nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 pneumococcal pneumonia and, IV:2633 pneumonia (See Pneumonia) pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 from respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 with TEF, V:3352 Lung perfusion scan, III:2051–2052 for pulmonary embolism, II:1170 for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785 Lung surgery, III:2052–2054 for aspergillosis, I:376 for atelectasis, I:390 for bronchiectasis, I:597 for cancer, III:2045 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in amenorrhea, I:147 in Klinefelter syndrome, III:1926 with premature menopause, IV:2702 tests for, III:2056–2057 Luteinizing hormone test, III:2056–2057 Lutropin. See Luteinizing hormone Lutzomyia verrucarum. See Psychodidae Luvox. See Fluvoxamine Luxations. See Dislocations Lycopdium, for bed-wetting, I:455 Lycopodium, for otitis media, IV:2435 Lycopodium, for tonsillitis, V:3328 Lycoprene, for thyroid cancer, V:3308 Lye esophageal cancer from, II:1240 with gastric lavage, IV:3169 Lying, in conduct disorder, II:882, 883 Lyme disease, III:2057–2061, 2058, 2059f antibiotics for, IV:2553 from blood transfusion, I:526 dementia from, II:1024 vs. ehrlichiosis, II:1142 vs. fibromyalgia, II:1326 vs. fifth disease, II:1329 Guillain-Barré syndrome from, IV:2549, 2550, 2552 infectious arthritis with, III:1820 paresthesia from, IV:2365 with uveitis, V:3461 zoonotic, V:3599 LYMErix, III:2060 LymeVax, III:2060 Lymph cancer. See Lymphomas Lymph drainage therapy. See Lymphatic drainage Lymph fluid in melanoma, III:2095 with pleural effusion, IV:2628 syphilis and, IV:3229 Lymph node angiography. See Lymphangiography Lymph node biopsy, I:47, II:639, III:2061–2064, 2062f for breast cancer, I:581, III:2062 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1644 with lumpectomy, III:2037–2038 with lung biopsy, III:2041–2042 for lymphadenitis, III:2065 for lymphomas, III:2093 with mastectomy, III:2130 for melanoma, III:2099 for plague, IV:2615 Lymph node cancer. See Lymphomas Lymph node diseases with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 kidney damage from, IV:2337 from pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Lymph node dissection. See Lymph node excision Lymph node excision with gastrectomy, III:1397 with lumpectomy, III:2036–2037 with mastectomy, III:2128 for melanoma, III:2098–2099 for testicular cancer, V:3258 Lymph nodes in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 in acute lymphangitis, I:46 biopsy of, III:2061–2063 in breast cancer staging, III:2129 cancer of (See Lymphomas) CAT scan of, II:877 in chancroid, II:729 in conjuntivitis, II:903 in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:975–977 elephantiasis and, II:1166, 1167–1168 enlarged from bacillary angiomatosis, I:434–435 from cat-scratch disease, II:669, 670 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 from dengue fever, II:1028 from epididymitis, II:1219 from lymphomas, III:2093 from measles, III:2139 from syphilis, IV:3228 gallium scan of, III:1384 in genital herpes, III:1441 in Hodgkin’s disease, III:1643–1645 in hysterectomy, III:1762 in infectious mononucleosis, III:1823 with juvenile arthritis, III:1892 in Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 with leishmaniasis, III:1975 in lymphadenitis, III:2064–2065 lymphedema of, III:2067 with lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071–2072 lymphography of, III:2066 in mastocytosis, III:2132 mediastinoscopy of, III:2143 in melanoma, III:2095 with melanoma, III:2096 with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 in pancreaticoduodenectomy, IV:2469 in yaws, V:3589 Lymph system. See Lymphatic system Lymphadenitis, III:2064, 2064–2065 from cellulitis, II:684 from chancroid, II:729 from furunculosis, I:536 mesenteric from adenoviruses, I:57 from yersiniosis, V:3592 Lymphadenopathy 3819 Lymphadenopathy chest drainage therapy for, II:743 for congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 cor pulmonale from, II:917 reduction, for emphysema, II:811, 1174, III:2051 Lung transplantation, II:989, III:2054–2056, 2054t for bronchiectasis, I:597 for COPD, II:811 for emphysema, II:1174 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for PAP, IV:2776 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 pulmonary hypertension and, IV:2785 for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2867 Lung tumor biopsy for, III:2040, 2042 from Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 with lung perfusion and ventilation scans, III:2052 Lung ventilation scan, III:2051–2052 Lung volume reduction, for COPD, II:811 Lungs. See Lung Lupron. See Leuprolide Lupus erythematosus alopecia from, I:126 with antiarrhythmics, I:236 from autoimmune response, II:915 dementia from, II:1024 discoid (See Discoid lupus erythematosus) with diuretics, II:1089 with glomerulonephritis, III:1461 in high risk pregnancy, III:1633 in hypothyroidism, III:1756 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1796 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 menorrhagia from, II:1112, III:2170 perforated septum from, IV:2535 pericarditis from, IV:2538 photosensitivity from, IV:2590 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 radial keratotomy and, IV:2804 with radiation therapy, III:2036, 2128 Raynaud disease, IV:2823, 2825 systemic (See Systemic lupus erythematosus) with warm antibody hemolytic anemia, I:181 Lupus erythematosus cell preparation test, IV:3233 Luque rod. See Spinal instrumentation Lust, Benedict, IV:2322 Luteal phase defect, III:2204 Luteinizing hormone Lymphadenopathy from genital herpes, III:1441 from scrub typhus, IV:2976 from tularemia, V:3411 Lymphangiography, III:2066 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 for lymphomas, III:2093 Lymphangiomas, I:493, 494, 496 Lymphangitis acute, I:46–48 with lymphadenitis, III:2064 Lymphatic cancer. See Lymphomas Lymphatic drainage for edema, II:1135 Lymphatic drainage, III:2127 Lymphatic filariasis, II:1330 Lymphatic obstruction edema from, III:2066–2067 from filariasis, II:1330 Lymphatic system in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 in edema, II:1133 function of, III:2062 in Hodgkin’s disease, III:1643 in hookworm disease, III:1667 infection of, I:46–47 in lymphadenitis, III:2064 obstruction of hydrocele from, III:1686 sporotrichosis in, IV:3143, 3144 in therapeutic touch, V:3282 in Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3543 Lymphatic system cancer. See Lymphomas Lymphatic system diseases lymphography for, III:2066 with measles, III:2139 Lymphedema, III:2066–2067 from axillary node dissection, III:2037 for breast cancer, I:584 edema from, II:1135 from elephantiasis, II:1167 from mastectomy, III:2130 Lymphocyte proliferation test, III:1785 Lymphocyte typing, III:2067–2069, 2068 Lymphocytes in complete blood count, I:522 in hairy cell leukemia, III:1501 HIV and, I:75–I:76, I:82, 84–85, 86–87 in infectious mononucleosis, III:1823 role of, III:1643 in sarcoidosis, IV:2940 WBC count and differential for, V:3556, 3557 See also specific lymphocytes Lymphocytic choriomeningitis, III:2069 Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonitis. See Interstitial lung diseases 3820 Lymphocytic leukemia, III:1579, 1986–1987 Lymphocytopenia, III:2068, III:2070 Lymphocytosis, III:1993, 2068 Lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071, 2071–2073 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 Lymphography. See Lymphangiography Lymphomas, II:631, 632, III:2092–2095, 2093 with acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 ascites from, I:371 ataxia-telangiectasia and, I:388 autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 biopsy for, III:2061–2064 blood transfusions for, V:3368 bone marrow aspiration for, I:549 chemotherapy for, II:639 chest x-ray for, II:747 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 cutaneous T-cell (See Cutaneous Tcell lymphoma) esophageal, II:1239 gastric (See Gastric lymphomas) gay health and, III:1415 Guillain-Barré syndrome with, III:1492 from head and neck cancer, III:1516 Hodgkin’s (See Hodgkin’s disease) hyperhidrosis from, III:1704 from Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 from kidney cancer, III:1910 after kidney transplantation, III:2030 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 lymphedema from, III:2067 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 lymphography for, III:2066 MALT, III:1567, III:2107–2110 mediastinoscopy for, III:2143, 2145 from myelofibrosis, III:2283 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 nodule from, IV:3075 parotid cancer from, IV:2504 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2935 sideroblastic anemia with, IV:3048 small intestine biopsy for, IV:3095 stomach, from Helicobacter pylori, III:1567 superior vena cava syndrome with, IV:3221–3222 Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3543–3547 with warm antibody hemolytic anemia, I:181 See also Hodgkin’s disease Lymphopenia. See Lymphocytopenia Lymphoscintigraphy, V:3537–3538 Lyre-leafed sage. See Sage Lysergic acid diethylamide, III:2073–2074 abuse of, IV:3207 delirium from, II:1021 hallucinations from, III:1504 Lysergide. See Lysergic acid diethylamide Lysine with cold sores, II:845–846 in cystinuria, II:990 for genital herpes, III:1442 Lysosomal alpha-D-glucosidase deficiency, III:1466 Lysosomal storage diseases, I:23 Lysozyme, in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 Lysyl oxidase deficiency, II:978 Lytic infection, I:56 M M-mode ultrasonography, I:4 M-proteins, III:2238, 2240, 2241, 2242 Ma-huang. See Ephedra Maalox. See Antacids MAC infections, III:2276–2277 with AIDS, I:76–77 antituberculosis drugs for, I:310 Machado-Joseph disease, III:2221 Macro minerals. See Minerals Macrobid. See Nitrofurantoin Macrobiotic diet for AIDS, I:81 for endometriosis, II:1194 Macrocytic anemia, IV:2838, 2839 See also Folic acid deficiency anemia; Pernicious anemia Macrodantin. See Nitrofurantoin Macroglobulinemia. See Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia Macrolides, I:241, 242 Macromastia, I:590 Macrophages with Echinacea, III:2254 with leishmaniasis, III:1975 with listeriosis, III:2013 in sarcoidosis, IV:2940 in silicosis, IV:3055 Macula, III:2075–2076, IV:3074 Maculae ceruleae, III:1995 Macular degeneration, III:2075–2078, 2076 age-related, I:69, III:2075–2077, IV:2997, 2999 with cataract surgery, II:671 color blindness from, II:860 cystoid (See Cystoid macular edema) laser eye surgery and, IV:2586 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Magnesium toxicity. See Hypermagnesemia Magnetic magnetite, IV:3092 Magnetic resonance angiography, III:2082 for encephalitis, II:1178 for paralysis, IV:2492 for pituitary tumors, IV:2607 for puberty disorders, IV:2773 for schistosomiasis, IV:2955 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 for TIA, V:3371 for tinnitus, V:3323 Magnetic resonance imaging, III:2081–2085, 2083 for acoustic neuroma, I:29–30 for acute kidney failure, I:45 for acute leukemia, III:1988 for adrenal gland cancer, I:60 with adrenalectomy, I:63 for AIDS, I:80 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:137, IV:3000 for amebiasis, I:145 for amnesia, I:152 for anal atresia, I:169 for aphasia, I:335 for arteriovenous malformations, I:358 for autoimmune diseases, I:424 vs. autopsy, I:426 for battered child syndrome, I:453 for bladder cancer, I:508 for botulism, I:561 for brain abscess, I:566 with brain biopsy, I:567–568 for brain tumor, I:571, 572 for breast cancer, I:580 for cancer, II:634, 636 with carcinoembryonic antigen test, II:653 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 for cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 for cerebral aneurysm, II:699 for cervical cancer, II:713 for cervical disk disease, II:718 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 before chemonucleolysis, II:739 for chondromalacia patellae, II:795–796 for choriocarcinomas, II:797 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for CNS infections, II:690 for coccyx injuries, II:837 for concussion, II:880 for congenital brain defects, II:891 for congenital heart disease, II:901 for congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 for cor pulmonale, II:917 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with coronary stents, II:935 for craniotomy, II:946 for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 for delirium, II:1022 for dementia, II:1026 for detached retina, IV:2877 for disk removal, II:1081 for dizziness, II:1095 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 for electric shock injuries, II:1143 for endocrine pancreatic cancer, IV:2472 for endometriosis, II:1193 for exophthalmos, II:1253 for facial paralysis, I:462 for fecal incontinence, II:1301 fever and, II:1315 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for fractures, II:1364 FUO and, II:1318 for galactorrhea, III:1376 for ganglion, III:1392 for gangrene, III:1394 for head and neck cancer, III:1517 for head injuries, III:1521 for headache, III:1524 for heart valve repair, III:1550 for hemochromatosis, III:1573 for histiocytosis, III:1639 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 in homeostasis monitoring, III:2000 for hydrocephalus, III:1687 for hydronephrosis, III:1689 for hyperthyroidism, III:1724 for hypopituitarism, III:1748 for hypothermia, III:1754 vs. intravenous urography, III:1854 for jaundice, III:1883 for kidney biopsy, III:1908 for kidney cancer, III:1910 for laryngeal cancer, III:1951 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 for low back pain, III:2032 lumbar puncture and, II:707 for lung cancer, III:2044, 2048 with lymphedema, III:2067 for lymphomas, III:2093 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 vs. mediastinoscopy, III:2144 for melanoma, III:2097 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 with mental status examination, III:2178 for migraines, III:2188 for movement disorders, III:2222 for mucormycosis, III:2232 for multiple myeloma, III:2241 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252, V:3381 for myelofibrosis, III:2282 with myelography, III:2284 3821 Magnetic resonance imaging visual impairment from, V:3510 Macules. See Macula Mad cow disease. See Bovine spongiform encephalopathy Mad dog weed. See Skullcap Mad weed. See Skullcap Madura foot. See Mycetoma Maduromycosis. See Mycetoma Magan. See Salicylates Magnesium with botulism, I:562 for constipation, II:907 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for dysmenorrhea, III:2172 in electrolyte disorders, II:1153, 1155, 1156 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 for endometriosis, II:1194 for headache, III:1524 for insomnia, III:1845 kidney function tests for, III:1913 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 for palpitations, IV:2466 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for parasitic disease, I:275 poisoning, III:2078 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for sleep disorders, IV:3092 before stool O & P test, IV:3174 supplements of, III:2195–2197 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 toxicity, III:2195 Magnesium chloride, III:2079 Magnesium citrate for bowel preparation, I:563 as laxative, III:1963 Magnesium deficiency, III:2078–2080, III:2190–2193 with bursitis, I:620 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 hypokalemia from, III:1731 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 Magnesium hydroxide in antacids, I:218 as laxative, III:1963 Magnesium salicylate, I:378 Magnesium salts, I:218 Magnesium sulfate for calluses, II:924 for constipation, II:907 for eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2693 for enterobiasis, II:1208 for hypomagnesemia, III:2192 as laxative, III:1963, 1964 for magnesium deficiency, III:2079 for premature labor, IV:2701 Magnetic resonance imaging for neuroblastoma, IV:2341 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 for optic neuritis, IV:2400 for orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 for osteoarthritis, IV:2413 for osteomyelitis, IV:2420 for otitis externa, IV:2432 for ovarian cancer, IV:2441 pacemaker and, IV:2453 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2474 for parathyroidectomy, IV:2498 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2579 for Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597 for pituitary adenoma, I:33 for precocious puberty, IV:2691 for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 for prostate cancer, IV:2731 for PSP, IV:2722 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 before radiation therapy, IV:2812 for renal vein thrombosis, IV:2859 for restrictive cardiomyopathy, IV:2873 for retinal vein occlusion, IV:2879 for retinoblastoma, IV:2884 for rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 for salivary gland tumors, IV:2934 for sarcomas, IV:2943, 2944 for sciatica, IV:2964 for scoliosis, IV:2972 sedation for, IV:2983 for situs inversus, IV:3060 for spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 for spinal stenosis, IV:3136 for splenic trauma, IV:3141, 3142 for stroke, IV:3195 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 for subdural hematoma, IV:3205 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for tapeworms, V:3240–3241 before thoracic surgery, V:3288 for thymoma, V:3302 for tinnitus, V:3323 for TMJ, V:3249 for transient ischemic attack, III:1869 for tremor, V:3381 for tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3395 for ventricular shunts, V:3502 for vitrectomy, V:3528 for vocal cord paralysis, V:3531 Magnetic resonance spectroscopy, III:2083 Magnetic resonance venography, V:3323 Magnetic therapy, III:2080–2081 for bipolar disorder, I:488 in heat treatment, III:1559 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 3822 Magnetoencephalography, I:571 Magnets, in MRI, III:2082, 2083 Mahabharata, V:3484 Maharishi Ayur-Ved, I:432 Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, I:429, 430, III:2146–2147, III:2147 Mahonia aquifolium. See Oregon grape Maidenhair tree. See Ginkgo Maine Woman’s Health Study, III:1763 Mainstreaming, III:1969 Maintenance sports massage. See Sports massage Major depressive disorder, II:1033 drug therapy for, IV:2768 from PTSD, IV:2686 See also Depression; Depressive disorders Major histocompatability complexes, I:422–423 Major histocompatibility complex proteins, III:1897 Major minerals. See Minerals Major tranquilizers. See Antipsychotic agents Majoram, for insomnia, III:1845 Make-up. See Cosmetics Mal de Cayenne. See Elephantiasis Mal de pinto. See Pinta Mal d’embarquement syndrome. See Motion sickness Malabsorption syndromes, III:2085–2088 with Crohn’s disease, II:956–958, 959 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 with giardiasis, III:1450 hypocalcemia from, III:1731 hypolipoproteinemia from, III:1741 magnesium deficiency from, III:2079 malnutrition from, III:2104 from pancreatitis, IV:2479 parathyroid hormone test for, IV:2495 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2743 roundworm infections and, IV:2925 with small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 stool fat test for, IV:3173 with sulfonamides, IV:3217 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 after ulcer surgery, V:3428 vitamin A deficiency from, V:3512 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 vitamin E deficiency from, V:3518 vitamin K deficiency from, V:3519 zinc deficiency from, III:2191 Malaleuca. See Tea tree oil Malaria, III:2088–2092, 2089f antihelminthic drugs for, I:273 antimalarial resistance, I:286 antiprotozoal drugs for, I:298 from blood transfusion, I:526 blood transfusions and, V:3367 drugs for, I:286 G6PD and, III:1464 with glomerulonephritis, III:1461 hyperhidrosis from, III:1704 hypersplenism from, III:1718 jaundice from, III:1881, 1882, 1884 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 neutropenia from, IV:2354 vs. rheumatoid arthritis, I:273 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2935 vs. schistosomiasis, IV:2955 urinalysis for, V:3445 Malaria vaccines, I:286, III:2091 Malathion, III:1842, 1995 Malaysia, hand-foot-and-mouth disease in, III:1506 Maldigestion, IV:3173–3174 Male breasts, excess growth. See Gynecomastia Male genitalia, III:1738 Male hormones. See Androgens Male infertility. See Infertility Male PAP test. See Prostate-specific antigen test Male pattern baldness. See Androgenic alopecia Male pseudohermaphrodite. See Hermaphroditism Male sexual dysfunctions. See Sexual dysfunctions Malignant B-cell disease, I:464 Malignant brain tumor. See Brain cancer Malignant carcinoid syndrome, IV:2343 Malignant hypertension, I:101 Malignant hyperthermia with anesthetics, I:187–188 dantrolene for, III:2258 with local anesthesia, I:191 with muscular dystrophy, III:2264 Malignant lymphomas. See Lymphomas Malignant melanoma. See Melanoma Malignant tumors. See Cancer Malingering, III:2100–2101 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 vs. factitious disorders, II:1277 vs. Munchausen syndrome, III:2257 Mallards. See Marsh mallow Mallet finger, III:2101–2102 Malleus in ear surgery, II:1123 in stapedectomy, IV:3154 Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2102–2103, V:3399 Malnourishment. See Malnutrition Malnutrition, III:2103–2105 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from pancreatitis, IV:2479 paresthesia from, IV:2365, 2366 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2550, 2553 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 pica and, IV:2595 pleural effusion from, IV:2628 protein components test for, IV:2745–2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 from pyloroplasty, IV:2792 roundworm infections and, IV:2925 with septic shock, IV:3005 starvation and, IV:3161–3162 stillbirth from, IV:3163 stomatitis with, IV:3170 with sulfonamides, IV:3217 TB tests and, V:3404 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3312 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 See also Diet Malocclusion, III:2105–2107, 2106, V:3249, 3325 Malpractice, autopsy and, I:426 MALT lymphomas, III:1567, III:2107–2110 Malta fever. See Brucellosis Maltose, in carbohydrates, II:649 Mamillary bodies, III:1930 Mammaplasty, IV:2621 Mammary arteries, II:927 Mammary dysplasia. See Fibrocystic condition of the breast Mammary hyperplasia, I:590 Mammary Paget’s disease. See Paget’s disease of the breast Mammary ultrasonography, I:592–594 with breast biopsy, I:575 for cancer, IV:2525, 2527 Mammogram. See Mammography Mammography, II:633, 634, III:2110–2113, 2111, V:3576 breast biopsy after, I:575 with breast implants, I:586 for breast reduction, I:591 with breast self-examination, I:591 for fibroadenoma, II:1321 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1324 for galactorrhea, III:1376 with hormone replacement therapy, III:2161 Mammoplasty. See Mammaplasty Mammotome, II:1324 Mandol. See Cefamandole Manganese deficiency of, III:2190–2192 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 movement disorders from, III:2221 poisoning, III:1560–1561 supplements of, III:2196 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 toxicity, III:2195 Mangled Extremity Severity Score, V:3377 Mania, III:2112–2113 in bipolar disorder, I:486 electroconvulsive therapy for, II:1149 in mood disorders, III:2216 neurologic examination for, IV:2351 phototherapy with, IV:2590 vs. schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 Manic depression. See Bipolar disorder Manic episode. See Mania Manipulation for adhesive capsulitis, I:366 for cluster headache, II:825 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for low back pain, III:2033 for pain, IV:2422–2423 for sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 for tennis elbow, V:3253 Manner metabolic therapy, II:1191 Mannitol for brain tumors, I:573 for Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 Manometry for diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1071 for esophageal diverticulum, II:1245 for esophageal function, II:1242, 1243 for fecal incontinence, II:1301 Mansonella, II:1330 Mansonia, II:1166 Mantle field radiation therapy, III:1646 Mantoux tests, tuberculin, II:1019, V:3402, 3407–3408 Manual lymph drainage. See Lymphatic drainage Manzanilla. See Chamomile MAO inhibitors. See Monoamine oxidase inhibitors MAOIs. See Monoamine oxidase inhibitors Maolate. See Chlorphenesin Maple syrup urine disease amino acid screening for, I:149 urinalysis for, V:3446 Maprotiline, I:256 with bronchodilators, I:602 with decongestants, II:1012 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:259 Maranto, Bartommeo, I:117 Marasmus. See Protein-energy malnutrition Marathons, in Gestalt therapy, III:1446 Marble bone disease. See Osteopetrosis Marburg hemorrhagic fever. See Marburg virus disease Marburg virus disease, III:1591 3823 Marburg virus disease acidosis from, III:2179 alcoholism and, I:92, 94–98 amenorrhea from, I:146 from amylophagia, IV:2596 anemia from, III:1576 bacteremia and, I:435 birth defects from, I:493 from carbohydrate intolerance, II:650 from cataonic schizophrenia, IV:2959 from celiac disease, II:682 from Chagas’ disease, II:728 from common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 Coxsackie B virus and, III:2289 with Crohn’s disease, II:957–958, 959 from cryptosporidiosis, II:967 from cyclosporiasis, II:981 from cystic fibrosis, II:984 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1019 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 from diarrhea, II:1066 edema from, II:1134 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 enteral nutrition for, V:3400 with enterobacterial infections, II:1205 fatty liver from, II:1298 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 flesh-eating disease with, II:1337 food poisoning and, II:1354 with hemophilus infections, III:1586 hospitalization for, IV:2769 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1708 hyperphosphatemia from, IV:2585 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 hypokalemia from, III:1740 hypolipoproteinemia from, III:1741 hypothermia from, III:1754 immunologic diseases and, III:1787 insulin-like growth factor I for, III:1488 iron tests for, III:1862, 1865 keratitis from, III:1904 low cholesterol from, II:794 lung abscess from, III:2039 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086–2087 mental retardation from, III:2175 with mineral deficiencies, III:2190–2192 from nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388 with overhydration, IV:2449 from pancreatic cancer, IV:2469 March of Dimes March of Dimes, II:887 Marezine. See Cyclizine Marfan syndrome, III:2114–2120 aortic dissection with, I:327 with bunions, I:615 cerebral aneurysm from, II:697 congenital heart disease and, II:900 from dominant inheritance, I:491 heart valve diseases from, V:3474 spinal instrumentation for, IV:3133 Marginal keratitis. See Keratitis Marian thistle. See Milk thistle Marie-Struempell disease. See Ankylosing spondylitis Marihuana. See Marijuana Marijuana, III:2119–2122 abuse of, III:1416, IV:3206, 3208 with breastfeeding, III:1943 with cystoscopy, II:996 delirium from, II:1021 emphysema from, II:1172 with general anesthetics, I:189 for glaucoma, III:1461 gynecomastia from, III:1497 hallucinations from, III:1504 hypogonadism from, III:1738 with LSD, III:2074 lung cancer from, III:2044, 2047 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 psychosis from, IV:2766 with regional anesthetics, I:191 substance abuse and, IV:3206 for supportive cancer therapy, II:643 Marijuana Tax Act of 1937, III:2120 Marijuana Transfer Tax Bill of 1937, III:2120 Marine animals, bites and stings of. See Bites and stings Marinol. See Dronabinol Marker X syndrome. See Fragile X syndrome Markers, tumor. See Tumor markers Marks, Robert, III:1555 Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome, III:2230 Marplan. See Isocarboxazid Marriage counseling, III:2122–2123 See also Couples therapy Marsh horsetail. See Horsetail Marsh mallow for amenorrhea, III:2172 for cystitis, II:994 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for furunculosis, I:538 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for urethritis, V:3441 Marshall, W., IV:2772 Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure, III:2123–2124, V:3455 Marsupialization, I:450 Martial arts. See Qigong; Tai chi 3824 Martin-Bell syndrome. See Fragile X syndrome Martini effect. See Inert gas narcosis Mary bud. See Calendula Mary thistle. See Milk thistle Masculinization from congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012, 3013, 3014 from testosterone replacement therapy, III:2162 Maslow, Abraham, III:1676 Masochism, IV:3018 Mass media, with dissociative identity disorder, III:2244 Massage, III:2126 with Aston-patterning, I:387 in ayurvedic medicine, I:431 for bed-wetting, I:455 breast, II:1325 for bruxism, I:609 for bunions, I:616 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for colic, II:847 for constipation, II:907 for corns and calluses, II:924 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for dacryocystitis, II:1004 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 for dizziness, II:1096 for dysmenorrhea, II:1118 for edema, II:1135 for facial paralysis, I:463 for genital herpes, III:1443 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1503 for hammertoe, III:1506 for headache, III:1524 for heat stress disorders, III:1557 for heel spurs, III:1563 for herniated disk, III:1630 HRT and, III:1673 for hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 for indigestion, III:1814 for insomnia, III:1845 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1938, 1939 for liver cancer, III:2021 for low back pain, III:2033 for mallet finger, III:2102 for menopause, III:2163 for multiple pregnancy, III:2249 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 for nausea, IV:2326 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for pain, IV:2422, 2460, 2463 for papilledema, IV:2488 for paresthesia, IV:2366 perineal (See Perineal massage) for pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2569 with rehabilitation, IV:2846 for rosacea, IV:2918 for sciatica, IV:2964, 2965 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 for stress, IV:3186 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for tennis elbow, V:3253 for tension headache, V:3255 with therapeutic touch, V:3283 for TMJ, V:3249 tui na, for low back pain, III:2033 Massage therapy, III:2124–2128 acupressure and, I:38 for AIDS, I:81 for alcoholism, I:98 aromatherapy and, I:349, 350 for brain tumors, I:573 for cancer, II:636 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 colonic irrigation and, II:855 for contractures, II:914 for costochondritis, II:940 eye (See Eye massage) for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for general adaptation syndrome, III:1425 Hellerwork and, III:1569 infant, II:833, III:1817–1819 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for scoliosis, IV:2972 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for stress reduction, IV:3190 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for TMJ, V:3250 Mast cell stabilizers for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:120–121 for anosmia, I:215 Mast cells in allergic reactions, I:115, 116, 118 in allergic rhinitis, I:111 in allergies, I:122 in anaphylaxis, I:179 in asthma, I:380 with hives, III:1642 in mastocytosis, III:2132 Mastalgia. See Fibrocystic condition of the breast Mastectomy, III:2128–2131, 2129f acute lymphangitis and, I:47 for breast cancer, I:581 breast implants for, I:585 breast reconstruction after, I:587 breast reduction after, I:590 female sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 vs. lumpectomy, III:2036 for Paget’s disease of the breast, III:2158 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Mayflower. See Hawthorn Maypop. See Passionflower Maze surgery for arrhythmias, I:354 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:408 Mazeran. See Metoclopramide Mazindol, for weight loss, IV:2376 MBTI. See Myers-Briggs type indicator McArdle’s disease. See Glycogen storage diseases McCartney, Paul, as vegetarian, V:3485 McClure, Vimala Schneider, III:1818 MCH. See Mean corpuscular hemoglobin MCHC. See Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration MCMI-III. See Millon clinical multiaxial inventory-III MCS. See Multiple chemical sensitivity MCV. See Mean corpuscular volume MDI. See Bronchodilators MDLs. See Medulloblastomas MDMA abuse of, III:1416, IV:3207 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 Meadow sage. See Sage Meadow trefoil. See Red clover Meadowsweet, for gastroenteritis, III:1409 Meal worms, V:3240 Mealberry. See Bearberry Mean corpuscular hemoglobin, IV:2838, 2839 Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, IV:2838–2839 Mean corpuscular volume, IV:2838 Measles, III:2138–2141, 2139, 2140 bronchiectasis from, I:596 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 conjunctivitis from, II:903 encephalitis from, II:1177 vs. fifth disease, II:1328 German (See Rubella) with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 vs. Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 labyrinthitis from, III:1935–1936 meningitis from, III:2154 mental retardation from, III:2175 vs. mumps, III:2255 myocarditis from, III:2289 vs. scarlet fever, IV:2952 seizures from, IV:2986 stomatitis with, IV:3170 subacute sclerosing panencephalitis from, IV:3200 transverse myelitis from, V:3375 vaccination for, V:3465 Measles, mumps, rubella vaccine, V:3465 children’s health and, II:762 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for mumps, III:2256 thyroiditis and, V:3320 Measles vaccine, III:2140 allergic purpura from, I:110 for mental retardation prevention, III:2175 Meat contamination (See Food contamination) listeriosis from, III:2012, 2014 tapeworm infections in, V:3239–3240 trichella spiralis in, V:3385–3386 yersiniosis from, V:3592 Meat substitutes, V:3486 Mebendazole for enterobiasis, II:1208 for fluke infection, II:1344 for hookworm disease, III:1668 for parasitic disease, I:273, 274 for roundworm infections, IV:2924 Mechanical debridement. See Debridement Mechanical heart valves, III:1511 Mechanical obstruction. See Intestinal obstruction Mechanical ventilation, III:1837–1841 for amyotrohpic lateral sclerosis, I:166 for ARDS, I:68 for asthma, I:383 for berylliosis, I:472 for burns, I:618 with chest physical therapy, II:746 for COPD, II:811 in coronary artery bypass grafting, II:927 CPAP (See Continuous positive airway pressure ventilation) cross infection from, III:1674 for diphtheria, II:1078 from gas embolism, III:1396 for Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492, 1493 after heart surgery, III:1544 for heart valve replacement, III:1551 for Japanese encephalitis, III:1880 for laryngitis, III:1958 for magnesium poisoning, III:2079 for muscular dystrophy, III:2263, 2266 for near drowning, IV:2327 for necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2553 with prematurity, III:2249, IV:2707 for pulmonary edema, IV:2778–2779 for respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 for sedation, IV:2984 for septic shock, IV:3005 3825 Mehcanical ventilation radical (See Radical mastectomy) See also Breast cancer; Lumpectomy Masters, William H., IV:2699 Mastitis, III:2131–2132, 2132 Mastocytoma, III:2132 Mastocytosis, III:2132–2133 Mastoid bone infection of, III:2134–2135 in parotidectomy, IV:2504 surgery of, III:2133 Mastoidectomy, II:1124, III:2133–2134, III:2135 Mastoiditis, III:2134–2135 brain abscess from, I:566 from otitis media, IV:2435 surgery for, II:1124 Mastopathy. See Fibrocystic condition of the breast Mastopexy, I:587 Masturbation, from child abuse, II:754 De Materia Medica, I:348, III:1616 Maternal age birth defects with, I:492 CVS and, II:798 Down syndrome from, II:1098, 1100 high-risk pregnancy and, III:1632 Patau syndrome and, IV:2510 in placenta previa, IV:2610 placental abruption from, IV:2612 stillbirth from, IV:3163 sudden infant death syndrome and, IV:3213 Maternal education. See Parent education Maternal-fetal exchange with cytomegalovirus infections, II:998–999, 999 hepatitis C from, III:1603 tropical spastic paraparesis from, V:3395 Mathematics disorders. See Dyscalculia Matricaria. See Chamomile Matricaria recutita. See Chamomile Matrix injuries. See Fingertip injuries Mauls. See Marsh mallow Maury, Mauguerite, I:349 Maxair, for asthma, I:120 Maxalt. See Rizatriptan Maxaquin. See Lomefloxacin Maxilla fractures. See Nasal trauma Maxillary sinus, IV:2312 Maxillofacial trauma, III:2135–2138, 2136 Maxillomandibular fixation. See Jaw fixation techniques Maxzide. See Hydrochlorothiazide-triamterene May rose. See Cramp bark Maybush. See Hawthorn Mehcanical ventilation for silicosis, IV:3055 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 for tetanus, V:3265 Mechlorethamine for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976, 977 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646 in MOPP/ABVC chemotherapy, III:1646 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 Meckel, Johann F., III:2141 Meckel-Gruber syndrome, IV:2664 Meckel’s diverticulum, III:2141, 2141–2143, IV:2661 Meclizine for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for motion sickness, III:2219 for nausea, IV:2326 Meclocycline, for acne, I:25 Meclofenamate sodium, I:378 Meconium aspiration syndrome, II:1256 Meconium ileus, II:985–986, III:1779, 1848 MED. See Minimum erythema dose Medial epicondylitis. See Tennis elbow Medial wall, V:3587 Median nerve in carpal tunnel syndrome, II:667 in paresthesia, IV:2365 Mediastinoscopy, III:2041, III:2143–2145, 2143f with thoracic surgery, V:3288 for thymoma, V:3302 Mediastinum diagnostic test for, III:2143–2145 in lung biopsy, III:2041 Medic-Alert tags, for anaphylaxis, I:180 Medicago sativa. See Alfalfa Medical abortion., I:10–11 Medical identification for anaphylaxis, I:180 with beta blockers, I:475 for digitalis, II:1074 for hormonal replacement drugs, IV:2608 for myasthenia gravis, III:2275 tumor removal for, V:3415 Medical licensing. See Certification and licensing Medical personnel training. See Education and training Medical qigong. See Qigong Medical research, autopsy for, I:425 Medical schools, homeopathy and, III:1664–1665 Medical urethral system, IV:3052 Medications. See Drugs; specific medications 3826 Medicinal marijuana. See Marijuana Medicinal plants. See Herbal medicine Medicines. See Drugs Medico-legal issues, with psychiatric confinement, IV:2760 Medipren. See Ibuprofen Meditation, III:2145–2149, 2147, 2148 for acute stress disorder, I:49 for AIDS, I:81 for alcoholism, I:98 for amenorrhea, III:2172 for anxiety, I:321, IV:2782 for anxiety disorders, I:323 for atherosclerosis, I:396 in ayurvedic medicine, I:428, 429, 431 for brain tumors, I:573 for canker sores, II:648 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for cluster headache, II:825 for common cold, II:871 for corns and calluses, II:924 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2247 for endometrial cancer, II:1191 for gastritis, III:1407 for genital herpes, III:1443 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1503 hallucinations from, III:1504 for headache, III:1524 HRT and, III:1673 for IBS, III:1867 for indigestion, III:1814, 1815 for insomnia, III:1845, IV:3092 for nausea, IV:2326 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for pain, IV:2460, 2463 for palpitations, IV:2466 for process addictions, I:52 qigong and, IV:2799 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for salivary gland tumors, IV:2934 for seizures, IV:2989 for self mutilation, IV:2994 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 for stress, IV:3186 for stress reduction, III:2165, IV:3189 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 transcendental (See Transcendental meditation) for weight loss, IV:2377 in yoga, V:3594, 3595 Mediterranean anemia. See Thalassemia Mediterranean diet, V:3485 Mediterranean fever. See Brucellosis Medroxyprogesterone. See DepoProvera Medullary cystic disease, II:1290 Medullary paralysis, I:186 Medullary sponge kidney, III:2149–2150 Medullary thyroid cancer, III:2236–2237 Medulloblastomas, I:570 MedWatch program, II:1103 Mefenamic acid, for costochondritis, II:940 Mefloquine effects on mental health, I:286 for jaundice, III:1884 for malaria, I:286, III:2090 Mefoxin. See Cefoxitin MEG. See Magnetoencephalography Megacolon, toxic. See Toxic megacolon Megakaryocytes, III:1985 Megalencephaly, II:890 Megaloblastic anemia, I:181 from folate deficiency, V:3524 from vitamin B12 deficiency, V:3525 Megavitamin therapy. See Vitamin therapy Megavoltage rays, II:639–640 Meglitinides, for diabetes, I:262, 263 Meglumin antimonate, for leishmaniasis, III:1976 Meichenbaum, Donald, II:842 Meigs’ syndrome, IV:2490 Melaleuca. See Tea tree oil Melaleuca alternifolia. See Tea tree oil Melanin, III:2095, 2096 detection of, I:91 in hyperpigmentation, III:1714 in pigmentation disorders, IV:3077, 3078 Melanin disorders. See Pigmentation disorders Melanocyte stimulating hormone, III:1714 Melanocytes, III:2095, 2096 cancer of (See Melanoma) in hyperpigmentation, III:1714 in vitiligo, IV:3078, V:3527 Melanoma, II:632, III:2095–2100, 2097 alfa interferons for, III:1792 anal cancer from, I:170 brain tumor from, I:569, 574 with cryotherapy, II:962 esophageal, II:1239 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 from moles, III:2210 vs. non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3066 parotid cancer from, IV:2504 skin biopsy for, IV:3065 skin lesions from, IV:3075 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in neurologic examination, IV:2350 for senior’s health, IV:3000 MEN. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia Menadiol sodium diphosphate. See Vitamin K Menadiones. See Vitamin K Menaquinone. See Vitamin K Mendelian inheritance, III:1466 Mendenhall, Dorothy, III:1645 Menghini needle, III:2017 Meniere, Prosper, III:2151 Meniere’s disease, III:2151–2153 dizziness from, II:1095 hearing loss from, III:1528 vs. labyrinthitis, III:1935 Meninges abscesses and, I:566 in congenital brain defects, II:891 infection of (See Meningitis) rheumatoid arthritis and, IV:2900 scarring of, III:2156 in subdural hematoma, IV:3204 tumors of, I:570 ventricular shunts for, V:3502 Meningiomas, I:570 Meningitis, III:2153–2157 from animal bite infections, I:206, 498 antibiotics for, I:241 from arbovirus encephalitis, I:347 bacterial (See Bacterial meningitis) from campylobacteriosis, II:630 from cellulitis, II:684 cerebrospinal fluid analysis for, II:706 from coccidioidomycosis, II:835 with complement deficiencies, II:874 cryptococcal (See Cryptococcal meningitis) fever and, II:1316 from genital herpes, III:1441 hearing loss from, III:1528 from hemophilus infections, III:1586, 1587 from human parvovirus B19, II:1329 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 LCM and, III:2069 learning disorders from, III:1969 from leptospirosis, III:1981 from listeriosis, III:2013 from mastoidectomy, III:2133, 2134 from mastoiditis, III:2135 from meningococcemia, III:2157 mental retardation from, III:2175 MRI for, III:2082 from mumps, III:2255 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 neonatal (See Neonatal meningitis) from nocardiosis, IV:2358 orbital and periorbital cellulitis from, IV:2407 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from otitis externa, IV:2432 vs. Reye’s syndrome, IV:2895 from salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 vs. shigella, II:1354 from shigellosis, IV:3028 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 from streptococcus agalactiae, IV:2541 sulfonamides for, IV:3216 throat cultures and, V:3293 See also Encephalitis Meningitis vaccine, II:874 Meningococcal infections vs. scrub typhus, IV:2976 with splenectomy, IV:3140 Meningococcal meningitis, III:2154 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 vaccination for, III:2156, V:3465 Meningococcemia, III:2157, 2157–2159 Meningococcus. See Neisseria meningitidis Meningoencephalitis, III:2278 Meningomyelocele, II:891 Menke’s disease from copper deficiency, III:2191–2192 from copper toxicity, III:2194 Menninger, Charles, I:368 Menninger, Karl, I:368 Menninger, William, I:368 Menninger Clinic, I:368 Menomune-A/C/Y/W-135, IV:3139 Menopause, III:2159–2164, V:3576 in amenorrhea, I:147 endometrial cancer and, II:1188 gout and, III:1477 HRT and, III:1669 HRT for, III:1669 hyperlipoproteinemia and, III:1707 vs. hypogonadism, III:1738 vs. hypothyroidism, III:1756 from hysterectomy, III:1760, 1763 luteinizing hormone test for, III:2056 as migraine trigger, III:2188 naturopathy for, IV:2324 after oophorectomy, IV:2393 osteoporosis after, IV:2425 osteoporosis with, IV:2996, 2999 vs. PMS, IV:2710 postmenopausal bleeding and, IV:2679 premature (See Premature menopause) from salpingo-oophorectomy, IV:2939 sex hormone tests for, IV:3013 sexual dysfunctions with, II:1308, IV:3016 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 3827 Menopause from sun exposure, IV:3220 vulvar cancer from, V:3536 See also Cancer Melanoma Intergroup Committee, III:2098 Melanotic freckle of Hutchinson. See Nevus Melasma, III:1715, IV:2697, 3078 Melatonin for insomnia, I:71 phototherapy and, IV:2590 in seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 for sleep disorders, IV:3092 Melena from hemorrhoids, I:275 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 from rectal polyps, IV:2834 sigmoidoscopy for, I:562 Melioidosis, III:2150–2151 Melissa officinalis. See Lemon balm Mellaril. See Thioridazine Melphalan for amyloidosis, I:162 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 Membranoproliferative glomerulonephropathy, IV:2335 Membranous glomerulopathy, IV:2335 Memory, childhood, III:2245 Memory disorders from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:134–138 with anoxia, I:217 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 from benzodiazepines, I:468 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 from CO poisoning, II:652 with delirium, II:1020 from dementia, II:1025 from electroconvulsive therapy, I:488 from encephalitis, II:1179 from head injuries, III:1520 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 from hypoglycemia, III:1735 from Korsakoff’s syndrome, III:1930–1931 from lead poisoning, III:1966 from menopause, III:2159 from multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 from multiple sclerosis, III:2250 from postconcussion syndrome, III:1521 from PTSD, IV:2686 senior’s health and, IV:2997–2998, 3001 Memory loss. See Memory disorders Memory tests in mental status examination, IV:2351 Menopause with uterine fibroids, V:3458 Menorrhagia, III:2169, 2170, 2171, 2172 D & C for, II:1075 vs. dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 from fibroids, III:1760 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 from menopause, III:2159 from uterine fibroids, V:3458 Menotropins for infertility, III:1830 for PCOS, IV:2656 for in vitro fertilization, III:1809 Menrium. See Chlordiazepoxide Men’s health, III:2164–2168 Mensendiek, Bess, III:2226 Mensendiek system, III:2226 Menstrual cramps. See Dysmenorrhea Menstrual cycle in birth control, IV:2401 breast self-examination after, I:591 with dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 in hirsutism, III:1637 in hysterosonography, III:1768 in infertility, III:1830 luteinizing hormone and, III:2056 menopause and, III:2159 Menstrual disorders, III:2169–2172 from Addison’s disease, I:54 in anorexia nervosa, I:212 aromatherapy for, I:348, 349 vs. dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 in edema, II:1134 endometrial biopsy for, II:1186 endometrial cancer and, II:1188 excessive bleeding (See Menorrhagia) FSH test for, II:1350 with galactorrhea, III:1375 with hirsutism, III:1637 from hormone contraceptives, II:912 from hyperthyroidism, III:1724 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 from immunotherapy, III:1794 infrequent menstruation (See Oligomenorrhea) IUDs and, II:912, III:1877 from menopause, III:2159 myomectomy for, III:2292 with oral contraceptives, IV:2403–2404 PCOS and, IV:2654–2655 from pituitary tumors, IV:2607 with prochlorperazine, I:293 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012, 3013 from uterine fibroids, V:3458 See also Amenorrhea; Menorrhagia 3828 Menstrual extraction, I:9–I:10 Menstrual regulation. See Menstrual extraction Menstruation cold sores from, II:844 with female genital mutilation, II:1306–1307 fibrocystic breasts and, II:1323 genital herpes outbreaks from, III:1440 with hormone contraceptives, II:1031, 1032 with IBS, III:1866 iron deficiency from, III:2191 as migraine trigger, III:2188 ovarian cancer and, IV:2440 paroxysmal atrial tachycardia from, IV:2505 PID and, IV:2522 with PMS, IV:2710 postmenopausal bleeding and, IV:2679 during pregnancy, III:2204 with premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2708–2709 thyroxin in, III:1470 toxic shock syndrome and, IV:3005 toxic shock syndrome during, V:3346 Menstruation cramps. See Dysmenorrhea Menstruation disorders. See Menstrual disorders Mental confusion. See Confusion Mental depression. See Depression Mental development of anxiety, I:318 thyroxine regulation of, III:1756 Mental disorders antimalarials and, I:286 with benzodiazepines, I:467 bronchodilators with, I:602 in children, II:762–763, 765 with chronic fatigue syndrome, II:802 vs. CO poisoning, II:651 with decongestants, II:1011 with delusions, II:1022 dissociative (See Dissociative disorders) in elderly, IV:2997–2998, 3000 electroconvulsive therapy for, II:1149 in gays and lesbians, III:1414, 1416 with Gestalt therapy, III:1446 hallucinations from, III:1504 with heart transplantation, III:1545 hypothermia from, III:1753 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1793–1794 itching from, III:1874 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1879–1880 vs. learning disorders, III:1969 vs. malingering, III:2100–2101 with MAO inhibitors, III:2213, 2215 marriage counseling for, III:2122 in men, III:2165, 2168 Munchausen syndrome as, III:2257–2258 music therapy for, III:2271 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with obesity surgery, IV:2379 pica and, IV:2595 with PMS, IV:2710 with prostatitis, IV:2741 psychosurgery for, IV:2769–2770 after rape, IV:2818 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 from steroids, I:382 from substance abuse, IV:3208–3209 in women, V:3576 See also specific disorders Mental health community services, III:2175 Mental illness. See Mental disorders Mental rehearsal, III:1491 Mental retardation, II:762, 765, III:2172–2176 from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 amino acid screening and, I:148 from anticonvulsants, I:490 with autism, IV:2568 from congenital brain defects, II:891 from copper deficiency, III:2192 from cri du chat syndrome, II:954 from cutis laxa, II:978 from cytomegalovirus, V:3339 from DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 from Down syndrome, II:1098–1101 from Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136, 1137 electroencephalography for, II:1151 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 from fetal alcohol syndrome, I:490 from Haemeophilus influenzae b, III:1586 from Hartnup disease, III:1511 from hookworm disease, III:1668 from hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 from isotretinoin, I:226 from Krabbe’s disease, III:2004 from lead poisoning, III:1965, 1966 vs. learning disorders, III:1969 from measles, III:2139 from molybdenum deficiency, III:2190 from muscular dystrophy, III:2262 from neonatal jaundice, IV:2330 parental, child abuse from, II:754 from perinatal infection, IV:2540, 2541 from peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Mercury poisoning, III:1560–1561 delirium from, II:1021 kidney damage from, IV:2337 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2550, 2553 tremor from, V:3381 Meridia. See Sibutramine Meridians. See Acupuncture points Mersol. See Thimerosol Mesantoin. See Mephenytoin Mescaline abuse of, IV:3207 hallucinations from, III:1504 Mesenteric angiography, I:198 Mesenteric lymphadenitis from adenoviruses, I:57 from yersiniosis, V:3592 Mesmer, Franz Anton, III:1729 Mesmerism, III:1729 Mesocaval shunt. See Portal vein bypass Mesolimbic dopamine system, IV:3208 Mesolimbic reward pathway. See Mesolimbic dopamine system Mesoridazine, for psychosis, I:300 Mesothelioma, pleural effusion from, IV:2629 MESS. See Mangled Extremity Severity Score Messenger, Eusebia, IV:2842 Mestinon. See Prostimine Metabolic acidosis. See Acidosis Metabolic alkalosis, II:1155, III:2180–2181 Metabolic diseases after adrenalectomy, I:64 blood gas analysis for, I:527 catatonia from, II:676 from congenital brain defects, II:891 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 delirium from, II:1020 drug-induced hepatitis as, III:1607 hermaphroditism from, III:1847 hiccups from, III:1632 hyperparathyroidism from, III:1713 with hyperthyroidism, III:1724 lipid, with cholesterol tests, II:794 lipoidosis as, III:2003 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 paralysis from, IV:2491–2492 paresthesia from, IV:2365, 2366 peripheral neuropathy and, IV:2550 peroxisomal, IV:2559 psychosis from, IV:2765–2766 urinalysis for, V:3446 See also specific diseases Metabolic encephalopathy. See Delirium Metabolic myopathy, II:1160 Metabolism GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 anaerobic, III:1944 brain (See Brain metabolism) of copper, V:3566–3567 energy (See Energy metabolism) with exercise, II:1250 in hypothermia, III:1754 PCOS and, IV:2654 SSRIs and, IV:2992 thyroxin in, III:1470 and vitamin B6 deficiency, V:3514 Metabolites, II:1102 Metacarpo phalangeal joint, II:820 Metacercariae, II:1342 Metal frames. See eyeglass frames Metals asthma from, I:380 drug interactions with, II:1102 heavy (See Heavy metal poisoning) with MRI, III:2082–2083 Metamucil. See Psyllium Metanephrines, IV:2578 Metaprel. See Metaproterenol Metaproterenol, I:601 Metastasis. See Cancer metastasis Metatarsal bone, in bunions, I:614 Metatarsophalangeal joint, I:614 Metaxalone, III:2259 Metered-dose inhalers. See Bronchodilators Metformin for diabetes mellitus, I:262, 263, II:1051 lactic acidosis from, III:1945 for PCOS, IV:2655 Methacholine, III:2002 Methadone, III:2181–2183 for addiction, I:52 for drug overdose, II:1106 hypogonadism from, III:1738 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788 for narcotics withdrawal, V:3573 for pain, IV:2460, 2463 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 substance abuse and, IV:3207, 3210 for substance abuse treatment, IV:3210 Methamphetamine abuse of, IV:3206 withdrawal from, V:3572 Methanol kidney damage from, IV:2337 movement disorders from, III:2221 overdose, III:2179 Methaqualone, for central nervous system depression, II:689 Methazolamide, V:3449 Methemoglobin, III:2183 kidney damage from, IV:2337 in nitrite poisoning, III:2194 Methemoglobinemia, III:2183–2184 3829 Methemoglobinemia pica and, IV:2595, 2596 from Prader-Willi syndrome, IV:2689 with Rett syndrome, IV:2568 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 from spina bifida, IV:3127 from starvation, IV:3162 from STDs, IV:3020 from Tay-Sachs disease, III:2004 from thyroxin, III:1471 with ventricular shunts, V:3502 Mental status examination, III:2176–2178 for delirium, II:1022 with neurologic examination, IV:2350–2351, 2352, 2353 for psychiatric confinement, IV:2760 Mental therapy. See Psychotherapy Mentastics, V:3361, 3362 Mentax. See Butenafine Mentha piperita. See Peppermint Menthol for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for physical allergy, IV:2592 for prickly heat, IV:2717 Mepergan. See Promethazine Meperidine heartburn from, III:1553 with hydroxyzine, I:285 with lipase test, III:2002 for migraines, III:2188 for pain, I:174, 178, IV:2463 withdrawal from, V:3572 Mephenytoin, for convulsions, I:253 Meprobamate for anxiety, I:320 in HRT, III:1669 Mercaptans, in liver encephalopathy, III:2022 alpha-Mercaptopropionylglycine, II:991 Mercaptopurine with gout drugs, III:1480 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1799 Mercurium iodatus, for sinusitis, IV:3059 Mercurius vivus for carbuncle, I:537 for furunculosis, I:537 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Mercury as antiseptic, I:307 in delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1019 kidney damage from, I:473 lung diseases from, III:2050 paresthesia from, IV:2365 for sore throats, IV:3120 Mercury oxide, for lice, III:1995 Methenamine Methenamine, for urinary tract infections, V:3447–3449 Methicillin, I:240, IV:2337 Methionine in brain proteins, II:952 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 Methocarbamol, III:2259 Methotrexate for abortion, I:10 alanine aminotransferase levels from, III:2024 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 with aspirin, I:379 with bismuth subsalicylate, I:266 with breastfeeding, III:1943 delirium from, II:1021 for ectopic pregnancy, II:1132 with gout drugs, III:1480 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for liver cancer, III:2021 in MOPP/ABVC chemotherapy, III:1646 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 pleurisy from, IV:2631 for polymyositis, IV:2667 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305–306, IV:2901 side effects of, I:248 for stomach cancer, IV:3167 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 for TMJ, V:3250 with ultraviolet light treatment, V:3436 Methsuccimide, for convulsions, I:253 Methylation tests, IV:2689 Methylcellulose for Crohn’s disease, II:959 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 as laxative, III:1964 Methyldopa autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 gynecomastia from, III:1497 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for pre-eclampsia, III:2197 Methylene blue G6PD and, III:1465 for methemoglobinemia, III:2184 for nitrite toxicity, III:2195 3,4 methylenedioxymethamphetamine, III:1504 Methylphenidate, II:691 for ADHD, I:412 for autism, I:420 for conduct disorder, II:884 with decongestants, II:1012 for narcolepsy, IV:3091 Methylphenyltetrahydropyridine. See MPTP 3830 Methylprednisolone with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252, 2253 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 Methylxanthine. for asthma, I:381 Methysergide for cluster headache, II:825 for headache, III:1523 Methysergide maleate, for migraines, I:289 Meticorten. See Prednisone Metoclopramide for hiatal hernias, III:1624 for hiccups, III:1632 for indigestion, III:1814 for migraines, III:2188 Metoprolol, I:475 with alprazolam, I:233 with antimalarials, I:288 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 for heart attacks, III:1534 Metrifonate, for urinary schistosomiasis, IV:2955 Metronidazole for amebiasis, I:145 for anaerobic infections, I:168 for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239 for balantidiasis, I:441 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for gastritis, III:1407 for giardiasis, III:1451 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for leishmaniasis, III:1976 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552 for protozoan infections, I:298 for rosacea, IV:2917–2918 for trichomoniasis, IV:2819, V:3388 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Metrorrhagia, II:1112 Metyrapone cortisol test with, II:937 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 Mevacor. See Lovastatin Mexate. See Methotrexate Mexican wild yam for menopause, III:2162 for PMS, IV:2711 Mexiletine with caffeine, II:626 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 Mezcalin. See Mescaline Mezereum, for shingles, IV:3032 MGUS. See Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance MHA-TP test. See Microhemagglutination T. pallidum test MHC-1 proteins. See Major histocompatibility complex proteins MHCs. See Major histocompatability complexes Miacalcin. See Calcitonin Miasms homeopathy and, III:1660 syphilis and, IV:3228 Micardis. See Telmisartan Micatin. See Miconazole Mice. See Rodents Miconazole for candidiasis, II:646 with cisapride, I:273 for fungal infections, I:270 for systemic fungal infection, I:267, 269 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Miconazole nitrate, for athlete’s foot, I:399 Microalbuminuria test, II:1050 Microbial colony count, V:3444 Microbial drug resistance with antibiotics, III:1822, IV:2635, 2727 in endocarditis, II:1185 ophthalmic antibiotics, I:243 penicillin, IV:2527 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 topical antibiotics, I:244–245 trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, IV:2636 MicroCanal. See Hearing aids Microcephaly, II:891 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 from radiation, I:490 Microcytic anemia. See Iron deficiency anemia; Thalassemia Microdiscectomy. See Disk removal Microemboli, TIA from, V:3371 Microencephaly, II:954 Microfilariae in elephantiasis, II:1166–1167 in filariasis, II:1330 Micrografts, for hair transplantation, I:126, III:1499 Microhemagglutination T. pallidum test, IV:3229 Microhyphema, III:1728 Microimmunofluorescence test, III:2072 Micronase. See Glyburide Microphthalmia, III:2184–2185 Microscopic analysis for bejel, I:460 dark-field, V:3589 for genital warts, III:1444 for otitis externa, IV:2432 for scabies, IV:2949 for tinea, IV:2908 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Miliaria crystallina, IV:2716 Miliaria profunda, IV:2716 Miliaria pustulosis, IV:2716 Military tuberculosis. See Tuberculosis Milk brucellosis from, I:605, 606 colic from, II:847 human (See Human milk) for hypophosphatemia, IV:2585 iron deficiency and, III:2191 pasteurized for Q fever prevention, IV:2797 for rat-bite fever prevention, IV:2822–2823 Q fever and, IV:2797 riboflavin deficiency and, IV:2906, 2907 with tetracyclines, V:3266 unpasteurized listeriosis from, III:2013 rat-bite fever from, IV:2822 Milk-alkali syndrome from drug interaction, II:1102 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 Milk contamination. See Food contamination Milk of magnesia. See Magnesium hydroxide Milk secretion. See Lactation Milk thistle for acne, I:26 for alcoholism, I:98 for hepatitis C, III:1604 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 for malaria, III:2090 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 Milk vetch for allergies, I:121 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Miller, Neal, I:482–483 Millon clinical multiaxial inventory-III, IV:2764 for bipolar disorder, I:486 for hysteria, III:1764 for personality disorders, IV:2565 for sleep disorders, IV:3091 Miloxzantrone HCI. See Novantrone Milrinone lactate, for pulmonary edema, IV:2778 Milwaukee brace. See Orthopedic braces Mind-body relations ayurvedic medicine, I:429–432 in Chinese therapy, I:41 detoxification therapy and, II:1041–1042 endometrial cancer and, II:1191 endometriosis and, II:1194 for palpitations, IV:2466 yoga and, V:3594 See also Guided imagery GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Mindfulness training, I:321 Mine Safety and Health Administration, IV:3056 Mineral deficiencies, III:2189–2193 hemolytic anemia from, III:1579 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086–2087 in malnutrition, III:2103 mineral supplements for, III:2195–2197 from starvation, IV:3161 Mineral oil for cerumen impaction, II:710 enema, for constipation, II:906 for heat treatment, III:1559 for hemorrhoids, I:275 as laxative, III:1964 with malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 for skin grafts, IV:3071 stool fats and, IV:3173 before stool O & P test, IV:3174 Mineral status assay, III:2196 Mineral supplements. See Minerals (Dietary) Mineral toxicity, III:2193–2195 Mineralocorticoid deficiency, II:936 Mineralocorticoids, II:936, 937 Minerals (Dietary), IV:2367–2368 bulimia and, I:612 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 by enteral nutrition, V:3401 for fatty liver, II:1299 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 for fractures, II:1365 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 HRT and, III:1673 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699–1700 in malnutrition, III:2103 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 for palpitations, IV:2466 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 with tetracyclines, V:3267 therapeutic use, III:2195–2198 toxicity of, III:2193–2195 Miner’s candle. See Mullein Miner’s elbow. See Bursitis Mini-Mental State Examination, III:2113 Mini-stroke. See Transient ischemic attack Mini-suction. See Menstrual extraction Minigrafts, for hair transplantation, III:1499 Minimal change disease, IV:2335–2336 Minimally invasive coronary artery bypass, II:927 3831 Minimally invasive coronary artery bypass Microsporum, I:270 Microsulfon. See Sulfadiazine Microsurgery, III:1426 for acoustic neuroma, I:30 for cholesteatoma, II:1122 for glaucoma, III:1458, 1459–1460 laser (See Laser microsurgery) for penile cancer, IV:2530 Microvascular surgery, III:2067 Microwave hyperthermia, II:1203 Mid-summer daisy. See Feverfew Midamor. See Amiloride Midazolam, II:1102 MIDCAb. See Minimally invasive coronary artery bypass Middle ear with altitude changes, I:427 with perforated eardrum, IV:2534 in stapedectomy, IV:3155 Middle ear infections. See Otitis media Middle ear ventilation, II:1123, III:2303–2306, 2304f adenoid hyperplasia and, I:55 with cerumen impaction, II:710 for labyrinthitis, III:1935 for otitis media, IV:2435 with perforated eardrum, IV:2534 Mifeprex. See Mifepristone Mifepristone, III:2186–2187 for abortion, I:10–11 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 Miglitol, for diabetes, I:262 Migraine, III:1523, III:2187–2189 Alexander technique for, I:103 amnesia from, I:152 anticonvulsants for, I:253 aromatherapy for, I:349 beta blockers for, I:474 biofeedback for, I:482 botulinum toxin injections for, I:558 calcium channel blockers for, II:627 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 vs. cluster headache, II:824 vs. CO poisoning, II:652 vs. cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:980 drugs for (See Antimigraine agents) electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1144 laser surgery for, III:1960 lavender for, I:349 nausea from, IV:2325 neurologic examination for, IV:2350 ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2395 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 SSRIs for, IV:2990 Migraine neuralgia, IV:2339 Migraine with aura. See Migraine Milameline, for Alzheimer’s disease, II:1026 Mile-a-minute vine. See Kudzu Miliaria. See Prickly heat Minimum erythema dose Minimum erythema dose, V:3436 Minimum phototoxic dose, V:3436 Minipress. See Prazosin Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, III:2198–2199, IV:2764 for binge eating disorder, I:481 for bipolar disorder, I:486 for depression, V:3576 for hysteria, III:1764 for personality disorders, IV:2565 for sleep disorders, IV:3090 Minnesota tube, V:3399–3400 Minocin. See Minocycline Minocycline, I:242 for acne, I:25 for rosacea, IV:2917 for syphilis, IV:3229 Minor tranquilizers. See Antianxiety drugs Minority health, III:2199–2202 Minoxidil, III:2202–2204 for alopecia, I:126 hirsutism from, III:1637 for hypertension, I:279–281 for vasodilation, V:3482 Mintezol. See Thiabendazole Miocardial infarction. See Heart attack Miotics, for glaucoma, III:1459 Miracidia fluke infection from, II:1342 schistosomiasis from, IV:2954 The Miracle of Life (Kellogg), V:3485 Mirapex. See Pramipexole Mirror coatings. See Lens coatings Mirtazepine, I:256 MIs. See Heart attack Misalignment. in osteopathy, IV:2422 Miscarriage, III:2204–2206 from amniocentesis, I:154, 156 antenatal tests and, I:219, 220 from antiarrhythmics, I:235 from brucellosis, I:605, 606 from caffeine, II:626 after cervical conization, II:718 choriocarcinoma after, II:797 after CVS, II:800 D & C after, II:1075 and DES, II:1039, 1040 with etopic pregnancy, II:1132 from fifth disease, II:1329 from genital herpes, IV:2541 in high risk pregnancy, III:1632, 1633 history of, CVS and, II:798 human chorionic gonadotropin test and, III:1680 hydatidiform mole from, III:1684 hysteroscopy for, III:1767 from incompetent cervix, III:1811 from listeriosis, III:2012, 2014 from malaria, III:2090 malaria and, I:287 3832 from mumps, III:2256 from nicotine use, IV:3110 from placenta previa, IV:2610 prematurity with, IV:2706 progesterone for, III:1846 recurrent, IV:2836–2837 from rubella, IV:2927, 2928 with selective abortion, I:8 vs. stillbirth, IV:3162 from thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 from toxoplasmosis, V:3349 from uterine fibroids, V:3458 from in vitro fertilization, III:1810 Misoprostol for abortion, I:10 with mifepristone, III:2186 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 Missed miscarriage. See Miscarriage Missouri snakeroot. See Echinacea Mistletoe for liver cancer, III:2021 for lung cancer, III:2045 for Paget’s disease of the breast, III:2158 Mites allergic rhinitis from, I:112 asthma from, I:380, 384 occupational asthma from, IV:2386 scabies from, IV:2948–2949 Mithracin. See Plicamycin Mithramycin. See Plicamycin Mitochondria for Alzheimer’s disease, II:1026 in Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2550 in Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 Mitochondrial encephalomyelopathy, IV:2395 Mitochondrial myopathy, II:1159, III:2295 Mitomycin, for anal cancer, I:171 Mitomycin-C for pinguecula and pterygium, IV:2602 for stomach cancer, IV:3167 Mitotane for adrenal gland cancer, I:60 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 Mitoxantrone, for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 Mitral atresia, III:1543 Mitral regurgitation. See Mitral valve insufficiency Mitral valve, II:900 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 in endocarditis, II:1182 in myxoma, III:2306 replacement of, III:1550–1552 for mitral valve insufficiency, III:2207 for mitral valve prolapse, III:2208 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 surgery of, III:2207 Mitral valve diseases heart valve repair for, III:1549 with hemoptysis, III:1589 in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 Mitral valve incompetence. See Mitral valve insufficiency Mitral valve insufficiency, III:2206–2207, V:3472 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 from endocarditis, II:1183 heart valve repair for, III:1550 from ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 Mitral valve prolapse, III:2207–2209, 2208f, V:3472 anxiety from, I:318 endocarditis from, II:1183 from Marfan syndrome, III:2115 Mitral valve regurgitation. See Mitral valve insufficiency Mitral valve stenosis, III:2209–2210, V:3472 balloon valvuloplasty for, I:442 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 heart valve repair for, III:1550 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 Mixed gliomas, I:570 Mixed lymphocyte reaction test, V:3324 Mixed sleep apnea, IV:3083 Mixject, for multiple sclerosis, III:2252–2253 MLD. See Lymphatic drainage MM. See Creatine kinase MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory MMR vaccine. See Measles, mumps, rubella vaccine MMSE. See Folstein Mini-Mental Status Examination MoAbs. See Monoclonal antibodies Mobility immobilization and, III:1782 after mastectomy, III:2130 in paralysis, IV:2490 in spinal cord injuries, IV:3129, 3130 Modified radical mastectomy, III:2129 Modified template method. See Bleeding time Moebius syndrome, IV:2661 Moexipril, for hypertension, I:203 Mohs surgery, IV:3067, 3073 Moist gangrene, III:1393–1394 Moist papules. See Condylomata lata Moist warts. See Genital warts Moisturizers, for psoriasis, IV:2757 Molar pregnancy. See Hydatidiform mole Mold allergic rhinitis from, I:112 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for mood disorders, III:2217 with opioid analgesics, I:178 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for phobias, IV:2583 prolactin test and, IV:2723 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2980 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 with SSRIs, IV:2991, 2993 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260–261 Monobenzone, for vitiligo, IV:3078 Monoclonal antibodies alemtuxumab, I:102–103 for brain tumors, I:573 for cancer, II:636 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647–1648 for liver cancer, III:2021 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2476 Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance, III:2242, 2243 Monocytes in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 in chronic leukemia, III:1990 laboratory tests for, III:1985 WBC count and differential for, V:3556, 3557 Monodox. See Doxycycline Mononeuritis multiplex, III:2278 Mononeuropathy, IV:2550 Monongahela virus, III:1508 Mononucleosis. See Infectious mononucleosis Mononucleosis-like syndrome, from roseola, IV:2920 Monoplegia, IV:2491 Monopril. See Fosinopril Monosaccharides, in carbohydrates, II:649 Monosodium glutamate, III:2213 Monospot antibody test, II:1224, III:1824 Monounsaturated fats, III:1708 Monovision contact lenses. See Contact lenses Monsel’s solution, for colposcopy, II:865 Montelukast, for allergies, I:121 Mood assesment, IV:2351 Mood changes antimalarials and, I:286 from CO poisoning, II:652 from delirium, II:1022 from dronabinol, II:645 from hypercalcemia, III:1697 from liver encephalopathy, III:2023 with phototherapy, IV:2590 from PMS, IV:2710 from premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from PTSD, IV:2686 Mood disorders, III:2216–2218 from ADHD, I:412 aromatherapy for, I:348, 349 binge eating disorder as, I:481 bipolar disorder as, I:485 catatonia with, II:676 from catatonic schizophrenia, IV:2959 in children, II:762 cognitive therapy for, II:840 with conduct disorder, II:883 with delusions, II:1022 with dissociative identity disorder, III:2244 from hormone contraceptives, II:912 insomnia from, III:1843 from opioid analgesics, I:178 with oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2396 psychosis with, IV:2765 psychosocial disorder as, IV:2768 schizoaffective disorder, IV:2956–2958 seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979–2980 from toxoplasmosis, V:3349 See also Postpartum depression Mood stabilizers for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 for mood disorders, III:2217 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957, 2958 Moose elm. See Slippery elm MOPP chemotherapy, III:1646, 1647 Moraxella catarrhalis laryngitis from, III:1957 otitis media from, IV:2433 Morbid obesity, surgery for, IV:2378–2380 Morbilli. See Measles Morbus herculeus. See Elephantiasis Morgan, Christiana, V:3279 Mormon tea. See Ephedra Morning after pill. See Emergency contraception Morning glory delirium from, II:1021 poisoning from, IV:2644 Morning sickness, IV:2325 See also Hyperemesis gravidarum Morphine abuse of, IV:3207 delirium from, II:1021 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 galactorrhea from, III:1375 heartburn from, III:1553 for kidney stones, III:1918 with lipase test, III:2002 overdose, II:1105 for pain, I:174, 175, IV:2460 3833 Morphine allergy tests for, I:123 blood culture for, I:523 extrinsic allergic alveolitis from, III:1716 itching from, I:285 lung diseases from, III:2050 sputum culture for, IV:3149 Mold spore allergies. See Allergy Molecular tests for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976 for sarcomas, IV:2943 Moles, III:2210–2212, 2211 melanocytes and, III:2095 vs. melanoma, III:1715 melanoma and, III:2095, 2096 See also Nevus Molluscum contagiosum, II:965 Molybdenum deficiency of, III:2190 supplements of, III:2196 toxicity, III:2194 Monaural hearing aids. See Hearing aids Monilial infection. See Vulvovaginal candidiasis Monistat. See Miconazole Monitoring after atherectomy, I:393 electronic, for SIDS, IV:3215 fetal (See Fetal monitoring) for homeostasis, III:2000 physiologic (See Physiologic monitoring) Monkeypox, III:2212–2213 Monkeys, yellow fever in, V:3590 Monk’s pepper. See Chasteberry Monkshood for arrhythmias, I:354 for croup, II:960 for laryngitis, III:1958 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for otitis media, IV:2435 for palpitations, IV:2466 Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, I:256–258, III:2213–2216 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antihemorrhoid agents, I:275 with antihistamines, I:278 with antimigraine agents, I:291 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 for anxiety, I:321 with beta blockers, I:477 for bipolar disorder, I:487 with bronchodilators, I:602 with buspirone, I:233 with caffeine, II:626 with cough suppressants, II:944 with decongestants, II:1012 for depression, II:1035 with dicyclomine, I:309 drug interactions with, II:1102, 1104 for migraine prevention, III:2189 Morphine for pain management, IV:2463 for palliative cancer therapy, II:642 for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 withdrawal from, V:3572 Morphine antagonists, I:266 Morphine sulfate, for heart attacks, III:1534 Morphogenetic proteins, in bone grafts, I:544 Morquio syndrome, III:2229–2230 Mortality rates infant, III:2199, 2201 from smoking, IV:3104 See also Death Mortification root. See Marsh mallow Mosaicism. See Down syndrome Mosquito bites. See Bites and stings Mosquitoes arbovirus encephalitis from, I:347 dengue fever from, II:1027 elephantiasis from, II:1166–1167 encephalitis from, II:1178 filariasis from, II:1330 hemorrhagic fevers from, III:1590, 1591, 1592 hives from, III:1642 Japanese encephalitis from, III:1879–1880 malaria from, I:286, III:2088, 2090–2091 meningitis from, III:2154 yellow fever from, V:3590 Mother-child bonding, II:761 Motherwort for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 for menopause, III:2162 Motility, gastrointestinal. See Gastrointestinal motility Motility drugs. See Prokinetic agents Motion sickness, III:2218–2220 antihistamines for, I:277 aviation medicine for, I:427 with dizziness, II:1094 from labyrinthitis, III:1935 nausea from, IV:2325 Motofen, for gastroenteritis, III:1409 Motor aphasia. See Broca’s aphasia Motor cortex, in movement disorders, III:2221 Motor disorders from catatonic stupor, II:675–676 neurogenic bladder from, IV:2346 with sciatica, IV:2964 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3025 in somatoform disorders, IV:3114 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3129 Motor examination, IV:2350, 2352 Motor neuron disease, I:163–167, IV:2841 See also Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 3834 Motor neurons degeneration of, I:163–164, II:1160 in electromyography, II:1160 electromyography for, II:1160 in muscle spasms and cramps, III:2260 neurologic examination for, IV:2350 in polio, IV:2649 Motor pathway, in paralysis, IV:2491 Motor seizures, IV:2985 Motor skills with ADHD, I:410 Bender-Gestalt test for, I:464–465 Motor tics. See Tic disorders Motorcycle accidents. See Traffic accidents Motrin. See Ibuprofen Mountain cranberry. See Bearberry Mountain lovage. See Osha Mouse ear. See Chickweed Mouth abnormalities of, gastrostomy for, III:1410 burns, from poisoning, IV:2645 care of (See Oral hygiene) dryness of (See Dry mouth) in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 inflammation of, IV:3170–3171 lesions, III:1975 lichen planus of, III:1997 with malocclusion, III:2105–2107 neurologic examination of, IV:2352 physical examination of, IV:2593 Mouth, dry. See Dry mouth Mouth cancer, III:1515–1519 physical examination for, II:634 radiation therapy for, II:639 screening for, IV:2405 Mouth diseases with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 dehydration from, II:1017 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 malocclusion from, III:2106 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 penicillin for, IV:2527 tumors, III:2236 Mouth dryness. See Dry mouth Mouth injuries. See Dental trauma Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Mouth ulcers, IV:2354 with Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 from chemotherapy, II:742 with Crohn’s disease, II:957 from lichen planus, III:1997 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 from stomatitis, IV:3170 Mouthguards, II:1030 Mouthwash for bad breath, I:437 dry mouth from, II:1109 for Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3064 for stomatitis, IV:3171 for toothache, V:3337 Movement disorders, III:2220–2224 from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 Alexander technique for, I:104–105 Aston-patterning for, I:386–387 from ataxia, I:387–389, II:1369 from benzodiazepines, I:468 with catatonia, II:675–676 drug-induced (See Tardive dyskinesia) from heavy metal poisoning, III:1560 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1880 from liver encephalopathy, III:2023 from mastectomy, III:2130 from measles, III:2139 from myopathies, III:2294 with pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2568–2569 from prochlorperazine, I:293 Movement meditation. See Meditation Movement therapy, III:2224–2227 Hellerwork and, III:1570 for stress reduction, IV:3189 Moving (Relocation), II:1288 Moxibustion, I:43, V:3360 Moxifloxacin, for bacterial infections, II:1344 MPD. See Minimum phototoxic dose; Paget’s disease of the breast MPS. See Mucopolysaccharidoses MPTP, IV:2500 See also Street drugs MRA. See Magnetic resonance angiography MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging MRP6 gene, IV:2753 MRS. See Magnetic resonance spectroscopy MRV. See Magnetic resonance venography MS. See Multiple sclerosis MSAFP test, for birth defects, I:492 MSE. See Mental status examination MSH 1 gene, III:1437 MSH 2 gene, III:1437 MSX1 gene, II:822 MTX. See Methotrexate Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis, III:1975 Mucocutaneous lymph node syndrome. See Kawasaki syndrome Mucomyst. See Acetylcysteine Mucopolysaccharides, III:2306 Mucopolysaccharidoses, III:2227–2231, III:2228 Mucor, mucormycosis from, III:2232 Mucormycosis, III:2231–2232 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 FSH test for, II:1350 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1, III:1403 Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, IV:2578 Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B, IV:2578 Multiple-gated acquisition scan, III:2233–2234 Multiple idiopathic hemorrhagic sarcoma. See Kaposi’s sarcoma Multiple marker screening. See Triple marker screening Multiple myeloma, III:2238–2244, 2239 acid phosphatase test for, I:23 with amyloidosis, I:161 Bence Jones protein test for, I:463 beta-2 microglobulin test for, I:473 bone marrow aspiration for, I:547 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 ESR and, II:1231 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1788 kidney stones from, III:1917 platelet aggregation test for, IV:2624 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 sideroblastic anemia with, IV:3048 Multiple opportunistic infections, with AIDS, III:1641 Multiple organ failure from flesh-eating disease, II:1337 from septic shock, IV:3005 Multiple personality disorder. See Dissociative identity disorder Multiple pregnancy, III:2247–2249, 2248 antepartum tests with, I:221 cerebral palsy, II:703–704 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 gallstones from, III:1388 from infertility drugs, III:1830 from infertility therapy, III:1833 miscarriage from, III:2204 placenta previa from, IV:2610 placental abruption from, IV:2612 premature labor from, IV:2701 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 prematurity with, IV:2706 prenatal ultrasonography for, IV:2525, 2527 selective abortion with, I:8 from in vitro fertilization, III:1810 Multiple sclerosis, I:422, 424, III:2249–2254, 2251f aldolase and, I:99 from antirheumatic drugs, I:307 cerebrospinal fluid analysis for, II:706 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 color blindness from, II:860 cystometry for, II:995 dementia from, II:1024 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 electromyography for, II:1255 vs. facial paralysis, I:462 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 hearing loss from, III:1528 with heat treatment, III:1559 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1796 impotence from, III:1805 internuclear ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2394 vs. Lyme disease, III:2059 MRI for, III:2082 muscle relaxants and, III:2258 muscle spasms and cramps of, III:2260 nystagmus from, IV:2372 optic atrophy and, IV:2398 paralysis from, IV:2491 paresthesia from, IV:2365 vs. progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 rectal prolapse from, IV:2835 sexual dysfunctions from, IV:3016, 3051 sphincter electromyography for, II:1255 transverse myelitis from, V:3375 tremor from, V:3381 urinary incontinence from, V:3453 Valsalva maneuver for, V:3471 visual evoked potentials for, II:1248 visual impairment from, V:3510 Multiple Sleep Latency Test, IV:3091 Multiple subpial transection, IV:2988 Multiple system atrophy, III:2221 Multisystem diseases, I:459–460 Multivitamin supplements. See Dietary supplements Mumps, III:2255–2257 amylase tests for, I:160 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 in delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1019 encephalitis from, II:1177 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 hypogonadism from, III:1738 labyrinthitis from, III:1935–1936 lipase test for, III:2002 vs. lymphadenitis, III:2064 meningitis from, III:2154 orchitis from, IV:2408 seizures from, IV:2986 vaccination for, V:3465 Mumps meningitis, III:2255 Munchausen by proxy, II:1277 Munchausen syndrome, II:1277, III:2257–2258 3835 Munchausen syndrome Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas. See MALT lymphomas Mucositis, IV:2815 Mucous colitis. See Irritable bowel syndrome Mucous membrane bleeding, from Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2102, 2103 in erythema multiforme, II:1226 of the genitals in gonorrhea, III:1471 in granuloma inguinale, III:1482–1483 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 menopause and, III:2159 Mycoplasma infection of, III:2278 nasal in nasal trauma, IV:2317 in smelling disorders, IV:3099 small intestine, biopsy for, IV:3094 throat infections of, IV:3117–3120 tumors from Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 Mucus atelectasis from, I:390 cervical, infertility and, III:1828–1829 chest physical therapy for, II:745 COPD and, II:809 expectorants for, II:1253 with lung diseases, III:2050, 2051 plug, II:759 after prostate ultrasound, IV:2736 Mud fever. See Leptospirosis MUGA scan. See Multiple-gated acquisition scan Muhammed Ali, concussion and, II:879 Mullein for bronchitis, I:600 for otitis media, IV:2435 for pleurisy, IV:2632 Multi-infarct dementia. See Vascular dementia Multibacillary leprosy. See Lepromatous leprosy Multifactorial inheritance celiac disease, II:681 in cleft lip and palate, II:819 in patent ductus arteriosus, IV:2514 Multifocal lenses, II:1266 Multifocal leukoencephalopathy, I:77 Multigated graft acquisition. See Multiple-gated acquisition scan Multigenerational families, II:1288 Multiple birth defects. See Birth defects Multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234–2236 Multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236–2238, 2237f endocrine pancreatic cancer and, IV:2471–2472 Munchausen syndrome by proxy Munchausen syndrome by proxy, II:754, III:2257–2258 Munro, Henry, III:1729 Mupirocin for carbuncle, I:537 for furunculosis, I:537 for impetigo, III:1802 for injuries, I:244 Murine, for cerumen impaction, II:710 Muromonab CD3, for immunosuppression, III:1796, 1799 Murphy’s sign, II:779 Murray, Henry, V:3279 Murray Valley encephalitis, I:347 Muscle atrophy from alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 in astronauts, I:427–428 from carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668 neurologic examination for, IV:2352 Muscle biopsy for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for muscular dystrophy, III:2265 for myopathies, III:2295 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2394 for periodic paralysis, IV:2544 for polymyositis, IV:2667 Muscle cancer, II:639 Muscle contraction botulinum toxin injections for, I:558–559, 560 central nervous system depressants for, II:688 in electromyography, II:1159 during exercise, II:1250–1251 headache from, III:1523 in movement disorders, III:2221–2222 in spasms and cramps, III:2260–2261 Muscle cramps. See Spasm Muscle damage from cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1941 from meningococcemia, III:2157 from mycetoma, III:2275 myoglobin and, III:2292 from nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 Muscle diseases. See Muscular diseases Muscle enzyme proteins, II:948 Muscle injuries. See Sprains and strains Muscle pain aromatherapy for, I:349 aspirin for, I:378 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 from fibromyalgia, II:1326 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 3836 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 Muscle phosphofructokinase deficiency, III:1467 Muscle proteins, III:2262 Muscle relaxants, III:2258–2260 with anticonvulsants, I:253, 255 with barbiturates, I:445 with benzodiazepines, I:467, 469 for bruxism, I:609 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 with cystoscopy, II:996 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 with dronabinol, II:644 with electromyography, II:1255 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for headache, III:1524 for herniated disk, III:1628 with hydroxyzine, I:285 with interferons, III:1793 for jaw fractures, III:2136 for low back pain, III:2032 magnesium poisoning from, III:2079 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 with opioid analgesics, I:178 for post-concussion syndrome, IV:2679 with prochlorperazine, I:293 for sciatica, IV:2964 with sphincter electromyography, II:1255 for spinal stenosis, IV:3136 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 for TMJ, V:3250 tracheotomy and, V:3355 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:259 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 with zolpidem, I:284 Muscle spasms. See Spasm Muscle stimulants, II:794 Muscle strains. See Sprains and strains Muscle tension. See Muscle contraction Muscle transfer, for rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 Muscle wasting, I:163, 165, III:2086, IV:3122 Muscle weakness cholinergic agents and, II:795 from diabetic neuropathies, II:1057 electromyography for, II:1159 exercise for, II:1249 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1370 from Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 from herniated disk, III:1628, 1630 from hypercalcemia, III:1697 from hyperthyroidism, III:1724 from muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267 from mushroom poisoning, III:2268 with myasthenia gravis, III:2272–2274 from myopathies, III:2295 with poliovirus, IV:2648–2649 in postpolio syndrome, IV:2683–2684 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 from scoliosis, IV:2970 from shellfish poisoning, II:1335, 1336 speech disorders from, IV:3123 tensilon test and, V:3253 Muscles abdominal (See Abdominal muscles) activity of, potassium in, III:1739 in Addison’s disease, I:53 aging of, I:69, II:1275 Alexander technique and, I:104–105 Apgar testing and, I:331 aspartate aminotransferase in, I:374 biopsy of (See Muscle biopsy) burns of, I:617 in bursitis, I:620 calcium levels and, III:1731 cancer of (See Muscle cancer) catecholamines in, II:677 in contracture, II:913 creatine kinase test for, II:948 damage to (See Muscle damage) degeneration of from muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267 from myopathies, III:2295 from pain, IV:2422 in dislocations and subluxations, II:1083 electromyography for testing, II:1159–1161 in flesh-eating disease, II:1336 lactate dehydrogenase in, III:1939, 1941 lactic acid and, III:1944 myopathies of, III:2293–2296 neurologic examination of, IV:2352 pain in (See Muscle pain) sensory receptors, in motion sickness, III:2218 shortening of, from traumatic amputations, V:3378 tears, repair of, III:1936 Muscular diseases creatine kinase test for, II:948 vs. peripheral neuropathy, IV:2553 reflex tests and, IV:2841 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 See also specific diseases Muscular dystrophy, III:2261–2267 aldolase and, I:99, 100 chest physical therapy for, II:745 cor pulmonale from, II:917 with creatinine test, II:950 electromyography for, II:1159 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 types of, III:1433–1434 See also specific conditions and genes Mutism, III:2271–2272 with catatonia, II:676 from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 Myalgia. See Muscle pain Myalgic encephalomyelitis. See Chronic fatigue syndrome Myambutol. See Ethambutol Myasthenia gravis, I:422, 423, III:2272–2275 with aminoglycosides, I:150 with antiarrhythmics, I:236 antimalarials and, I:287 with benzodiazepines, I:467 with beta blockers, I:476 vs. botulism, I:560 chest physical therapy for, II:745 cholinergic agents for, II:794–795 deglutition disorders from, II:1243 with dicyclomine, I:309 dyspnea from, IV:3036 electromyography for, II:1160 with erythromycin, I:242 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1796 vs. muscular dystrophy, III:2265 ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2395 plasmapheresis for, IV:2619 with polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 tarsorrhaphy and, V:3243 tensilon test for, V:3253–3254 thymoma from, V:3302 Myasthenic crisis, III:2273 Mycelex. See Topical antifungal drugs Mycetoma, III:2275–2276 Mycifradin. See Neomycin Mycitracin, for folliculitis, II:1351 Mycobacteria, aminocglycosides for, I:150 Mycobacterium avium complex. See MAC infections Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare. See MAC infections Mycobacterium infections, III:2276–2277 Mycobacterium kansasii, III:2276–2277 Mycobacterium leprae, III:1977–1979, V:3579 Mycobacterium marinum, III:2277 Mycobacterium scrofulacium, III:2277 Mycobacterium tuberculosis, III:2276, V:3405–3410 drugs for, I:309–313 sputum culture for, IV:3149, 3150 Mycobacterium ulcerans, III:2277 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Mycobutin. See Rifabutin Mycolog-II. See Topical antifungal drugs Mycopehnolate, III:1796 Mycoplasma fermentans, III:1495, 1496 Mycoplasma hominis, III:2278 Mycoplasma infection, III:2278–2279 Mycoplasma pneumonia, III:2278, IV:2639 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 erythema multiforme from, II:1226 Mycoplasma pneumoniae infection of, III:2278 sputum culture for, IV:3149, 3150 Mycoses acute lymphangitis from, I:47 Addison’s disease from, I:53 alopecia from, I:125 balanitis from, I:439–440 brain abscess from, I:566 cough from, II:941 drugs for (See Antifungal drugs) vs. enterobiasis, II:1208 foot care with, II:1357 vs. granuloma inguinale, III:1483 hemoptysis from, III:1589 hospital acquired, III:1674 invasive, I:375 itching from, III:1874 joint biopsy for, III:1888 KOH test for, III:1929 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 laryngitis from, III:1957 with liver transplantation, III:2030 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 mycetoma from, III:2275 nail removal for, IV:2309 onychomycosis, IV:2390–2394 pericarditis from, IV:2538 scaling from, IV:3075 skin culture for, IV:3068 South American blastomycosis, IV:3120–3121 sputum culture for, IV:3149 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1889 topical antibiotics and, I:245 vulvovaginitis from, V:3539 See also Coccidioidomycosis; Fungi; Tinea Mycosis fungoides. See Cutaneous Tcell lymphoma Mycostatin. See Nystatin Myelin with JC virus, IV:2720 in peripheral neuropathy, IV:2549–2550 Myelin protein zero gene, II:733–734 Myelin sheath with acoustic neuroma, I:27, 28 in adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 in encephalitis, II:1178 3837 Myelin sheath lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 myoglobin levels and, III:2292 as a myopathy, III:2293–2294, 2295 ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2395 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 scoliosis from, IV:2971 See also Myotonic dystrophy Muscular Dystrophy Association, I:166 Musculoskeletal diseases aldolase and, I:99–100 applied kinesiology and, III:1924–1925 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 osteopathy for, IV:2421–2423 See also specific diseases Musculoskeletal system AIDS and, I:77 Behcet’s syndrome and, I:459 with beriberi, I:470 in osteopathy, IV:2421–2423 physical examination of, IV:2593–2594 in therapeutic touch, V:3282 MUSE system, IV:3052 Mushroom poisoning, III:2267–2269, 2268 delirium from, II:1021 liver transplantation for, III:2028 See also Food poisoning Music therapy, III:2269–2271 for anxiety, IV:2782 auditory integration training, I:415–417 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 for general adaptation syndrome, III:1425 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1503 for pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2569 for stress reduction, IV:3190 Mustard, for weight loss, IV:2377 Mustard gas, lung diseases from, III:2050 Mutation achondroplasia from, I:22 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:135 in ataxia-telangiectasia, I:388 in cancer, II:632, 634 congenital brain defects from, II:891 in Crueztfeldt-Jakob disease, II:952–953 genetic testing and, III:1433–1435 hemoglobinopathies from, III:1577 in HIV, I:86 prolonged QT syndrome from, IV:2724 pyruvate kinase deficiency as, IV:2794 Myelin sheath in Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 with JC virus, IV:2720 in multiple sclerosis, III:2249–2250 VLCFAs and, IV:2560 Myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2279–2281 Myelofibrosis, III:2281–2283 bone marrow aspiration for, I:549 splenectomy for, IV:3139 Myelography, III:2283–2285 for brain tumor, I:572 for cervical disk disease, II:718 before chemonucleolysis, II:739 for disk removal, II:1081 for herniated disk, III:1628 for orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 for paralysis, IV:2492 for sciatica, IV:2964 for spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 Myelolymphangioma. See Elephantiasis Myeloma. See Multiple myeloma Myeloperoxidase stain, for leukemia, III:1985 Myelosclerosis. See Myelofibrosis Myelosuppressive therapy, IV:2659 Myers-Briggs type indicator, III:2285–2286 Mylanta. See Antacids Mylanta Gas Relief. See Simethicone Mylicon. See Simethicone Myoblast transfer, for muscular dystrophy, III:2267 Myocardial biopsy. See Heart biopsy Myocardial diseases antimyocardial antibody test for, I:291–292 detected by MUGA scan, III:2233–2234 heart failure from, III:1538 hypertrophic (See Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy) from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 ventricular tachycardia from, V:3504 Myocardial infarction. See Heart attack Myocardial infarction scan. See Technetium heart scan Myocardial ischemia, III:1868–1871 atrial fibrillation and flutter and, I:408 from coronary heart disease, II:929 detected by MUGA scan, III:2233 electrocardiography for, II:1148 thallium heart scan for, V:3278 Myocardial resection, III:2288 Myocarditis, III:2288–2291, 2289 bundle branch block from, I:614 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 from diphtheria, II:1077 3838 from enteroviruses, II:1212 giant cell (See Giant cell myocarditis) from human parvovirus B19, II:1329 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 from leptospirosis, III:1981 with Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 from scrub typhus, IV:2976 from trichinosis, V:3386 from yersiniosis, V:3592–3593 Myocardium in catheter ablation, II:679 creatine kinase test with, II:948 echocardiography for, II:1129 in heart attacks, III:1534 Myochrysine. See Gold sodium Myoclonic seizures, IV:2985 Myoclonus, III:2222 from anoxia, I:216, 217 from Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 neurologic examination for, IV:2352 Myocutaneous flap. See Surgical flaps Myoglobin levels of, with heart attack, III:2291–2292 with troponins test, V:3396 Myoglobin test, I:374, III:2291–2292 Myoglobinuria, II:948 Myomas. See Uterine fibroids Myomectomy, III:1760–1761, III:2292–2293, V:3459 Myonecrosis, III:1393 in alcoholic myopathy, I:92–93 from gangrene, III:1393 Myopathy, III:2293–2296 alcoholic, I:91, 92–93, 94 cardiomyopathy (See Myocardial diseases) congenital, electromyography for, II:1159 inflammatory (See Inflammatory myopathy) metabolic, electromyography for, II:1160 mitochondrial, II:1159, III:2295 ocular, IV:2394 See also Muscular diseases Myopia, III:2296–2301, 2297 from albinism, I:90 vs. astigmatism, I:384–385 eyeglasses and contact lenses for, II:1265 laser eye surgery for, IV:2586–2588 macular degeneration from, III:2076 from Marfan syndrome, III:2115 nystagmus from, IV:2372 radial keratotomy for, IV:2803–2806 Myosin, in muscle spasms and cramps, III:2260 Myositis, creatine kinase test for, II:948 Myositis ossificans, III:2294 Myotomy-myectomy, III:1726 Myotonia electromyography for, II:1160 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 Myotonia atrophica. See Myotonic dystrophy Myotonia congenita, III:2261, 2294 Myotonic dystrophy, III:2262–2267, 2295, III:2301–2303 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 Myotonic dystrophy protein kinase, III:2301–2302 Myotubular myopathy, III:2294 Myrica. See Bayberry Myricaceae. See Bayberry Myringocentesis. See Middle ear ventilation Myringotomy. See Middle ear ventilation Myrrh for blastomycosis, I:513 for canker sores, II:648 for furunculosis, I:538 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Myrtle, in aromatherapy, I:349 Myrtus communis. See Myrtle Mytelase. See Ambenonium chloride Myxedema, V:3312 Myxedema coma, III:1757 Myxoma, III:2306 Myxomatous degeneration heart valve diseases from, V:3474 mitral valve insufficiency from, III:2206 N N-acetylcysteine for allergies, I:121 for drug overdose, II:1106 N-dimethyltryptamine, III:1504 NA. See Narcotics Anonymous Na. See Sodium Na2HPO4. See Sodium phosphate Nabumetone, IV:2361 NAC. See N-acetylcysteine NADase, IV:3181 NADH. See Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide methemoglobin reductase Nadolol, I:475, III:1534 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for influenza, III:1835 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for menorrhagia, III:2171 for migraines, III:2188 for pain management, IV:2462 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, IV:2901 for tendinitis, V:3251 Naps, insomnia with, III:1844 Napthalene, III:1465 Naratriptan, for migraines, I:289, 290, 291 Narcan, for coma, II:868 Narcissistic personality disorder, IV:2564–2567 Narcolepsy, IV:2310–2312, IV:3087 neurologic examination, IV:2350 polysomnography for, IV:2668, 2669 Narcotics abuse of, IV:3207, 3208 ammonia levels from, III:2024 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 ARDS from, I:67 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 for central nervous system depression, II:689 for childbirth, II:761 cocaine as, II:831 constipation from, II:906 for cough, II:942 with cystoscopy, II:996 delirium from, II:1021 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for endometriosis, II:1194 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 for frostbite, II:1372 gas embolism from, II:1170 for general anesthesia, I:187 for herniated disk, III:1628 vs. inert gas narcosis, IV:2356 lactate dehydrogenase levels and, III:1939 magnesium poisoning from, III:2079 overdose, II:1105 for pain, I:173–175, IV:2460 for pain management, IV:2462–2463, 2464 for palliative cancer therapy, II:642 for paresthesia, IV:2366 prolactin test and, IV:2723 for quality of life, with terminal illness, II:1006 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for sciatica, IV:2964 for sedation, IV:2984 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 withdrawal from, V:3573 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 See also Opioid analgesics; specific narcotics Narcotics Anonymous, I:52, 98 Nardil. See Phenelzine Narrow-angle glaucoma. See Glaucoma Nasal cavity cancer, III:1515–1519 Nasal cavity tumors, III:2236 Nasal congestion, II:1010–1013 Nasal cytology, IV:3100 Nasal decongestants. See Decongestants Nasal diphtheria, II:1077 Nasal fractures. See Nasal trauma Nasal irrigation, IV:2312–2313, 2318f for deviated septum, II:1045 Nasal lavage. See Nasal irrigation Nasal occlusion anosmia and, I:215 from deviated septum, II:1045 Nasal packing, IV:2313–2315 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 for trauma, IV:2318 Nasal papillomas, IV:2315 Nasal polypectomy for nasal polyps, IV:2316 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 Nasal polyps, IV:2315–2317, 2316 anosmia from, I:215, IV:3099 with aspirin, I:378 with asthma, I:380, 381, 383 endoscopy for, IV:3057 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 vs. nasal papillomas, IV:2315 Nasal septum deviated (See Deviated septum) injuries to, III:2136–2137 irritation of, from cocaine, II:833, IV:3209 with mucormycosis, III:2232 nasal packing for, IV:2313 in nasal trauma, IV:2317, 2318 in nosebleeds, IV:2364 surgery of, IV:3006–3007 Nasal sprays for allergies, I:119 decongestant, II:1011–1012 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938, 1939 for middle ear, I:427 for perforated septum, IV:2535 for RSV, IV:2868 for sinusitis, IV:3058 Nasal steams, I:215 Nasal strips, IV:3112 Nasal surgery. See Rhinoplasty Nasal trauma, IV:2317–2319, 2318 Nasal vestibular stenosis, IV:2317 Nasal washing. See Nasal irrigation Nasobiliary drain, for cholangitis, II:776 Nasoenteral tubes 3839 Nasoenteral tubes Nafarelin, for precocious puberty, IV:2691 Nafcil. See Nafcillin Nafcillin for clenched fist injury, II:821 for lymphadenitis, III:2065 Naftifine for fungal infections, I:270 for tinea, IV:2908 Naftin. See Naftifine NaHCO3. See Sodium bicarbonate Nail debridement, IV:2391 Nail deformities, II:1333 Nail-patella syndrome, IV:2307–2309 Nail psoriasis, IV:2755–2756 Nail removal, II:1333, IV:2309–2310, 2310f Nail ringworm. See Tinea Nails abnormalities of, III:1744, IV:2756, 2759 biting, IV:2309 fungal infections of, III:1929 tinea and, IV:2908, 2909 Nairovirus, III:1592 Nalbuphine, for pain, I:174 NALD. See Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy Naldolol, for thyroiditis, V:3320 Nalidixic acid fluoroquinolones and, II:1346 G6PD and, III:1465 for urinary tract infections, V:3447–3449 Nalmefene for alcoholism, I:98 for drug overdose, II:1106 Naloxone for drug overdose, II:1106 for respiratory acidosis, IV:2861 Naltrexone for addiction, I:52, 98 for autism, I:420 with opioid analgesics, I:178 for rapid opiate detoxification, V:3574 Nandrolone, with estrogens, III:1670 Naphazoline, anosmia from, IV:3099 Naprelan. See Naproxen Naprosyn. See Naproxen Naproxen, IV:2361 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:138 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 aspirin allergy and, I:378 bruises from, I:607 for bursitis, I:621 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:803 for costochondritis, II:940 for dysmenorrhea, II:1117, III:2171 for endometriosis, II:1194 for gout, III:1477 for headache, III:1524 Nasoenteral tubes for anorexia nervosa, I:213 with bowel resection, I:564 for cholecystitis, II:779 with colostomy, II:862, 863 for enteral nutrition, V:3401 for gastric lavage, IV:3169 for malnutrition, III:2105 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 necrotizing enterocolitis from, IV:2328 for pancreatitis, IV:2480 for suctioning, IV:2320 TEF and, V:3352 with urinary diversion, V:3452 for vagotomy, V:3470 x-rays with, III:1923 Nasogastric suction, IV:2319–2320 for gastric lavage, IV:3169 for roundworm infections, IV:2925 Nasogastric tubes. See Nasoenteral tubes Nasolacrimal ducts, II:1003, III:1938 Nasopharyngeal cancer, III:1515–1519 Nasopharyngeal culture, IV:2320–2322 Nasopharyngoscopy, V:3490 Nasospecific therapy for anosmia, I:215 for deviated septum, II:1045 NAT. See Child abuse Nateglitinide, for diabetes, I:262 National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center, I:140 National Cancer Institute on alternative cancer therapies, III:2021 on cancer, II:637 on cervical cancer treatment, IV:2487 on gastrointestinal cancers, II:1303 on hypercalcemia, III:1697 NSABP Project and, I:584 on pancreatic cancer treatment, IV:2477 on prostate cancer treatment, IV:2733 on PSA test, IV:2735 on stomach cancer, IV:3164 National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, III:2049 National Center for Juvenile Justice, IV:2817 National Cholesterol Education Program on cholesterol testing, III:2007 on cholesterol tests, II:792 on recommended fat calories, IV:2378 National Committee to Prevent Child Abuse, II:756 National Comprehensive Cancer Network, IV:2734 National Depressive and Manic Depressive Association, I:485 3840 National Down Syndrome Congress, II:1100 National Down Syndrome Society, II:1100 National Eye Institute, IV:2806 National Formulary U.S. Dispensatory, III:1616 National Glycosylation Standardization Program, III:1469 National Health and Nutrition Survey, III:1440 National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, III:1803 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, IV:3206 on cocaine use, II:832 on substance abuse, IV:3206 National Institute of Drug Abuse, IV:2817 National Institute of Justice, IV:2816–2817 National Institute of Mental Health on bipolar disorder, I:485 on psychosocial disorders, IV:2769 on St. John’s wort, II:1035 National Institute of Reflexology. See International Institute of Reflexology National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, I:95, IV:3206, 3211 National Institute on Drug Abuse on cocaine use during pregnancy, II:832 on LSD, III:2073 National Institutes of Health on acupuncture, I:43 on chelation therapy, II:738 on cholesterol testing, III:2007 on congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:886 on dizziness, II:1094 on dyslexia, II:1114 on gastrinomas, III:1403 on glaucoma, III:1461 on medical use of marijuana, II:643 on senior’s health, IV:2996 Shy-Drager syndrome and, IV:3038 on sudden infant death syndrome, IV:3215 National Longitudinal Alcohol Epidemiologic Survey, IV:3206 National Parents Anonymous, II:756 National Sleep Foundation, IV:2997 National Spasmodic Torticollis Association, V:3340 National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project, I:584 National Violence Against Women Survey, IV:2816–2817 National Wilms’ Tumor Study Group, V:3565–3566 National Women’s Study, IV:2817–2818 Natural childbirth, II:761 Natural detoxification. See Detoxification therapy Natural disasters, IV:2685 Natural estrogens. See Estrogens Natural hormone therapy, IV:2427 Natural penicillins, I:240 Natural progesterone. See Progesterone Natural remedies. See Naturopathy Naturalyte. See Oral rehydration solutions Naturetin. See Thiazide diuretics Naturopathic medicine. See Naturopathy Naturopathy, IV:2322–2324 history of, III:1618 for stress reduction, IV:3190 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Naughty man’s cherries. See Belladonna Naumburg, Margaret, I:368 Nausea, IV:2324–2326, 2325 from anticancer drugs, I:246 antihistamines for, I:276, 277 from chemotherapy, II:742 from decongestants, II:1011–1012 dehydration from, II:1017 drugs for, I:292–294 from dyspepsia, II:1118 with exercise, II:1249 from gammaglobulin, III:1392 from growth hormone suppression test, III:1489 from heat treatment, III:1560 from Helicobacter pylori, III:1566 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 ipecac and, III:1857–1859 lavender for, I:349 from mineral toxicity, III:2194–2195 from poisoning, IV:2645 with pregnancy, IV:2695 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 from psoralens, V:3436 from radiation therapy, II:1191, IV:2812 from sedation, IV:2984 supportive cancer therapy for, II:642–645 See also Antiemetics; Vomiting NCJJ. See National Center for Juvenile Justice Nd:YAG. See Laser surgery NE. See Neurologic examination Near drowning, IV:2326–2328 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1564 hypothermia and, V:3562 hypothermia from, III:1754 Nearsightedness. See Myopia Nebcin. See Tobramycin Nebulizers and vaporizers for aspergillosis, I:376 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Needle aspiration for carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 in liver biopsy, III:2017 with lung biopsy, III:2041, 2042 for mastoiditis, III:2134 for pancreatectomy, IV:2469 for priapism, IV:2715 Needle biopsy, II:639 with bone x-rays, I:557 of breast, I:575 with CT scan, II:968 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 of joints, III:1888 for prostate biopsy, IV:2727 for sarcomas, IV:2943 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for thyroid cancer, V:3307 with thyroid ultrasonography, V:3316 for thyroidectomy, V:3317 for tumor removal, V:3416 with ultrasonography, I:2 Needle sharing hepatitis C from, III:1603, 1604 hepatitis G from, III:1609 infection control for, III:1822 malaria from, III:2088 melioidosis from, III:2150, 2151 syphilis from, IV:3226, 3230 tropical spastic paraparesis from, V:3395 Needle sticks hepatitis B from, III:1600 hepatitis C from, III:1603 hepatitis D from, III:1605 See also Cross infection; Infection control Needlepoint scalpel, IV:2309 Nefazodone, I:233, II:1102 Negative control, in allergy tests, I:124 Negative schizophrenia. See Schizophrenia Negative suction, in chest drainage therapy, II:744 NegGram. See Nalidixic acid Neglect, child. See Child abuse Nei Ching, The Yellow Emperor’s Classic of Internal Medicine, I:40, III:2080 Neisseria gonorrhoeae gonorrhea from, III:1471, 1472, IV:2817, 2819, 3020 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 STDs from, IV:2522 Neisseria meningitidis meningitis from, III:2154 meningococcemia from, III:2157 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 type B (See Neisseria meningitidis) Nelfinavir for AIDS, I:80 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 as protease inhibitors, IV:2742 for retrovirus diseases, I:303 Nemaline myopathy, III:2294 Nematocysts, I:499 Nematode infections. See Roundworm infections Nematodes. See Roundworms Nembutal. See Pentobarbital Neo-Synephrine. See Phenylephrine Neoadjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer, I:584 for cancer, II:636 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2476 Neodymium:yttrium-aluminum-garnet laser. See Laser surgery Neomycin, I:150, 151 for bowel resection, I:564 for colostomy, II:862 for folliculitis, II:1351 for injuries, I:244 kidney damage from, IV:2337 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 with protein electrophoresis, IV:2747 with rubella vaccine, V:3466 stool fats and, IV:3173 with urinary diversion, V:3452 Neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66, IV:2560 Neonatal diseases. See Newborn infants; specific diseases Neonatal Graves’ disease. See Graves’ disease Neonatal herpes infection. See Genital herpes Neonatal inclusion conjunctivitis. See Inclusion conjunctivitis Neonatal jaundice, III:1882, 1883, IV:2330–2332, 2331 Neonatal lupus, IV:3234 Neonatal meningitis, II:1235, 1237 Neonatal myasthenia, III:2273 Neonatal tetanus, V:3264 Neoplasms, II:632 See also Cancer; Cancer metastasis Neoral. See Cyclosporine Neosar. See Cyclophosphamide Neosporin. See Neomycin Neostigmine, for myasthenia gravis, II:794, III:2274 Neovascularization from inclusion conjunctivitis, III:1811 from macular degeneration, III:2076 from retinal vein occlusion, IV:2879 Nephrectomy, IV:2332–2333 for kidney cancer, III:1910 for kidney transplantation, III:1919–1920 Nephritis, I:131, IV:2333–2334 Nephroblastoma, III:1909 3841 Nephroblastoma for asthma, I:237 with chest physical therapy, II:745 for influenza, III:1835 for laryngitis, III:1958 for measles, III:2140 for wheezing, V:3554 NebuPent. See Pentamidine NEC. See Necrotizing enterocolitis Necator americanus, III:1667 Neck abscess, from mastoiditis, III:2135 burns of, I:617 in cervical disk disease, II:718–719 in cervical spondylosis, II:720 neuralgia from, IV:2339 physical examination of, IV:2593 tumors of, vs. lymphadenitis, III:2064 Neck cancer. See Head and neck cancers Neck dissection, III:1952 Neck injuries blood gas analysis for, I:528 with chest physical therapy, II:745 near drowning from, IV:2327 whiplash, V:3555–3556 Neck pain from cervical disk disease, II:718–719 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1144 osteopathy for, IV:2422 Neck surgery for cervical disk disease, II:719 hypoparathyroidism from, III:1744 vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 Necrosis in anaerobic infections, I:168 from angiography, I:200 cholestasis from, II:784 debridement for, II:1007, 1008 from flesh-eating disease, II:1336–1337 from gonorrhea, III:1472 from hernias, III:1624 from laser surgery, III:1960 from meningococcemia, III:2157–2158 from renal artery occlusion, IV:2855, 2856 stoma, II:863 from upper GI series, V:3439 See also Gangrene Necrotic arachnidism, I:499 Necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328–2330 from enterobacterial infections, II:1205 with prematurity, IV:2706 Necrotizing fasciitis. See Flesh-eating disease Necrotizing pancreatitis, IV:2479 Nedocromil, for asthma, I:382 Nephrogenic diabetes insipids Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. See Diabetes insipidus Nephrography, III:1854 Nephrons in chronic kidney failure, II:807 in nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 Nephrosis, paracentesis for, IV:2490 Nephrotic syndrome, IV:2334–2336, 2335 from Alport’s syndrome, I:132 with cholesterol tests, II:794 paracentesis for, IV:2490 protein components test for, IV:2745 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 urinalysis for, V:3445 Nephrotomography, III:1854 Nephrotoxic injury, IV:2336–2338 Neroli. See Bitter orange Nerve activity cardiovascular, IV:3052, 3054 evoked potential studies for, II:1248 of the heart, I:614 Nerve biopsy for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2553 Nerve block, I:190 for arthroscopy, I:366 celiac ganglion, III:1380 for coccyx injuries, II:837 for pain management, IV:2463 for post-concussion syndrome, IV:2679 for reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2840 Nerve cells. See Neurons Nerve compression, IV:2365 from achondroplasia, I:22 from acoustic neuroma, I:28–29 in carpal tunnel syndrome, II:667–668 in facial paralysis, I:461–462, 462 pain from, IV:2339 paralysis from, IV:2491 paresthesia from, IV:2365 sciatica from, IV:2963, 2964 in thoracic outlet syndrome, V:3286 trigeminal neuralgia from, V:3391 Nerve conduction velocity test for carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668 for cervical spondylosis, II:721 with electromyography, II:1160 with evoked potential studies, II:1248 for Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 for paralysis, IV:2492 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2553 for sciatica, IV:2964 for spinal stenosis, IV:3136 for thoracic outlet syndrome, V:3287 Nerve damage, III:2260 3842 from antitubercular agents, I:492 from antituberculosis drugs, I:312 from aortic dissection, I:327 from arthroscopic surgery, I:364 from arthroscopy, I:366 from beriberi, I:470 from carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668 Charcot’s joints from, II:736 chronic pain from, IV:2459 contracture from, II:913, 914 from cryotherapy, II:964 from diabetic neuropathies, II:1057, 1058 from disk removal, II:1082 from electric brain stimulation, II:1146 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 evoked potential studies for, II:1249 from eye muscle surgery, II:1270 from face lift, II:1276 from facial injuries, III:1885 from forceps delivery, II:758–759 from Gaucher’s disease, III:2004 from heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 from herniated disk, III:1628 from hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 from immobilization, III:1782 impotence from, III:1805 from joint replacement, III:1892 from Krabbe’s disease, III:2004 movement disorders from, III:2221 from nephrectomy, IV:2332 neuralgia from, IV:2338–2339 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004, 2006 with nitrofurantoin, V:3448 orthostatic hypotension from, IV:2411 from osteopetroses, IV:2424 from otitis externa, IV:2432 paresthesia from, IV:2365 from radial neck dissection, IV:2814–2815 reflex sympathetic dystrophy from, IV:2839–2840 from rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 with sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 sciatica from, IV:2964 from selenium toxicity, III:2195 Shy-Drager syndrome from, IV:3038 from skin lesion removal, IV:3073 from spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 from synovial fluid analysis, III:1889 from thiamine deficiency, V:3525 from vitamin E deficiency, V:3518, 3524 from vitamin toxicity, V:3522 from whiplash, V:3555 See also Neuralgia Nerve degeneration evoked potential studies for, II:1249 from flesh-eating disease, II:1336–1337 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2260 in PSP, IV:2721 in subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3200 trigeminal neuralgia from, V:3391 Nerve entrapment. See Nerve compression Nerve gas Gulf War syndrome and, III:1495 lung diseases from, III:2050 Nerve grafting, IV:2504 Nerve impulses, I:190 Nerve regeneration, IV:2492 Nerve roots compression of, III:2284 with herniated disk, III:1628 injuries of, III:2284 in paresthesia, IV:2365 Nerve surgery, IV:2463–2464 Nerves acoustic (See Acoustic nerve) auditory, with cochlear implants, II:838 cranial (See Cranial nerves) electrical stimulation for, II:1144–1145 glossopharyngeal (See Glossopharyngeal neuralgia) injuries to, V:3289 irritation, from tooth extraction, V:3334 laryngeal (See Laryngeal nerves) lesions of cystometry for, II:995 electromyography for, II:1160 evoked potential studies for, II:1248 median (See Median nerve) optic (See Optic nerve) pain from (See Neuralgia) paralysis of from lithotripsy, III:2016 parasympathetic in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 peripheral, IV:2549–2550 phrenic (See Phrenic nerve) restriction of in Buerger’s disease, I:611 sacral in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 trigeminal (See Trigeminal nerve) ulnar in paresthesia, IV:2365 vagus (See Vagus nerve) Nervocaine. See Lidocaine Nervous colon. See Irritable bowel syndrome Nervous system with aging, I:69 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Nettle for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for anemia, I:184 for dermatitis, II:1038 for menorrhagia, III:2172 Neupogen. See Filgrastim Neural activity. See Nerve activity Neural conduction calcium levels and, III:1731 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 in Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 peripheral neuropathy and, IV:2550 sodium for, III:1710, 1742 Neural crest cells, IV:2344–2345 Neural tube defects alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 congenital brain defects from, II:890 folic acid and, II:1347 folic acid for, I:493 mental retardation from, III:2175 Neuralgia, IV:2338–2340 See also Nerve damage; Postherpetic neuralgia Neurally mediated hypotension, II:802 Neurasthenia. See Chronic fatigue syndrome Neurilemmoma, I:27, 570 Neuritic plaque, II:695 Neuritis. See Peripheral neuropathy Neuroblast cells, IV:2340–2341 Neuroblastoma, II:677, 678, IV:2340–2343, 2341 Neurocardiogenic syncope. See Fainting Neurochemical transmitters in bipolar disorder, I:486 Neurocysticerosis from tapeworms, V:3239–3240, 3241 Neurodegenerative disease from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:163–167 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease as, II:950–954 Neurodermatitis. See Lichen simplex chronicus Neuroendocrine cells, IV:2343 tumors from (See Neuroendocrine tumors) Neuroendocrine system, acupressure and, I:39 Neuroendocrine tumors, IV:2343–2344 Neurofeedback. See Electroencephalograph biofeedback Neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer’s disease, II:1024 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:135, 137, 140 Neurofibromatosis, IV:2344–2346, 2345 with acoustic neuroma, I:28 autism and, II:764 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 brain tumors from, I:569 ephelides from, III:1715 pheochromocytomas and, IV:2578 spinal instrumentation for, IV:3133 Neurogenic bladder, IV:2346–2348 electromyography for, II:1255 sphincter electromyography for, II:1255 Neurohormone acetylcholine cholinergic antagonists for, I:308 Neuroleptic malignant syndrome with antidepressants, I:257 from antipsychotic agents, II:676–677 from antipsychotic drugs, I:300 See also Catatonia Neuroleptics. See Antipsychotic agents Neurolinguistic programming, IV:2349–2350 for panic disorder, IV:2483 Neurologic examination, IV:2350–2353 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:137 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 for brain tumors, I:571, 572 for catatonia, II:676 for concussion, II:879 for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:953 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1057 for Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 for headache, III:1523 for paresthesia, IV:2366 during physical examination, IV:2594 for polymyositis, IV:2667 for post-concussion syndrome, IV:2679 reflex tests and, IV:2841 for scoliosis, IV:2971 for senior’s health, IV:2999 Neurologic manifestations from brain abscess, I:566 of dehydration, II:1017 from diarrhea, II:1066 from herniated disk, III:1628, 1630 from hyperkalemia, III:1705 from hypernatremia, III:1710 from marathon running, III:1743 from near drowning, IV:2327–2328 Neurological deficits. See Nervous system diseases Neurological diseases. See Nervous system diseases Neurological examination. See Neurologic examination Neurolysis. See Nerve block Neuroma, acoustic, I:27–31 Neuromuscular diseases with anticancer agents, I:248 breathing capacity and, III:1999 cor pulmonale from, II:917 3843 Neuromuscular diseases in arbovirus encephalitis, I:347 with beriberi, I:470 depression of from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 evoked potential studies for, II:1248 injuries to from electric shock, II:1143 from Gulf War syndrome, III:1495–1496 reflex tests and, IV:2840–2841 vitamin B12 for, IV:3161 Nervous system diseases ADHD and, I:410 alcohol-related, I:91–94, 91–95 with amyloidosis, I:162 from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:163–167 antimalarials and, I:287 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 ataxia-telangiectasia as, I:387–389 vs. botulism, I:560 chemonucleolysis and, II:739 from congenital brain defects, II:891 diabetic neuropathies, II:1057–1058 dizziness from, II:1094 electromyography for, II:1159 evoked potential studies for, II:1248–1249 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 from fish and shellfish poisoning, II:1334, 1335 from food poisoning, II:1353, 1354–1355 foot care with, II:1357 Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369–1370 from lead poisoning, III:1965 neuroendocrine cells and, IV:2343 neurogenic bladder from, IV:2346 neurologic examination for, IV:2350–2353 paranoia from, IV:2493 plasmapheresis for, IV:2619 psychosis from, IV:2765–2766 rehabilitation for, IV:2847 from riboflavin deficiency, IV:2906 vs. schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 sexual dysfunctions with, IV:3016 speech disorders from, IV:3123 Stanford-Binet intelligence scale for, IV:3153 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3203 tardive dyskinesia, V:3242–3243 Tourette syndrome, V:3341–3345 transverse myelitis, V:3375–3376 tremor from, V:3381 See also Thoracic outlet syndrome Nervous system diseases Bender-Gestalt test for, I:465 obesity from, IV:2374 Nervous system tumors, II:678 Nervousness. See Anxiety Netilmicin, I:150 Neuromuscular diseases deglutition disorders from, II:1243 dyspnea from, IV:3036 electrolyte disorders with, II:1155 electromyography for, II:1159–1161 rehabilitation for, IV:2847 scoliosis from, IV:2971, 2972 Neuromuscular examination for myasthenia gravis, III:2273 Neuromuscular scoliosis. See Scoliosis Neurons in Alzheimer’s disease, I:135 in arteriovenous malformations, I:358 in Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 in movement disorders, III:2221 in multiple sclerosis, III:2249 in pain, IV:2459 in paresthesia, IV:2365 in peripheral nervous system, IV:2549 Neurontin. See Gabapentin Neurontonin. See Gabapentin Neuropathic joint disease. See Charcot’s joints Neuropathies, II:733–734 See also Peripheral neuropathy; specific diseases Neuropeptides in migraine, III:2187 neuroendocrine tumors and, IV:2343 Neuropsychological tests, IV:2763, 2764 Bender-Gestalt, I:465 MMPI-2 and, III:2198 Stanford-Binet intelligence scale, IV:3153 with ventricular shunts, V:3502 Neurostimulators with MRI, III:2082 Neurosurgery angiography for, I:197 brain abscess from, I:566 Neurosyphilis, IV:3228 Neurotoxins in food poisoning, II:1354–1355 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552–2553, 2554 Neurotransmitters in ADHD, I:410 with Alzheimer’s disease, I:135 with antidepressants, I:256 in depression, II:1033 in electromyography, II:1255 in local anesthesia, I:190 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 in migraine, III:2187 in mood disorders, III:2216, 2217 neuroendocrine tumors and, IV:2343 in pain, IV:2459 in peripheral nerve system, IV:2550 in PMS, IV:2710 in schizophrenia, IV:2959 3844 withdrawal syndrome and, V:3573 Neutral density filters for amblyopia, I:142 Neutral protamine Hagedorn for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 Neutropenia, IV:2353–2355 from alemtuzumab, I:102 from anticancer drugs, I:246 with clozapine, I:300, 302, 488 from ganciclovir, I:316 Neutrophilia, III:1993 vs. leukocytosis, III:1993 Neutrophils in complete blood count, I:522 in leukocytosis, III:1993 low levels of (See Neutropenia) WBC count and differential for, V:3556, 3557 Nevirapine for AIDS, I:80, IV:2359 for retrovirus diseases, I:303, 304 Nevus, IV:3078 See also Birthmarks; Moles Nevus araneus. See Spider angiomas Nevus flammeus. See Port wine stains Nevus simplex, I:494, 496 New England Journal of Medicine, I:331 New York virus, III:1508 Newborn infants amino acid screening for, I:148–149 Apgar testing for, I:331–332 with atelectasis, I:390 with benzodiazepines, I:467 with chlamydial pneumonia, II:771 with congenital lobar emphysema (See Lung surgery) ECMO for, II:1256 with esophageal atresia, II:1238 with G6PD, III:1464 generalized disease of from enteroviruses, II:1212 with genital herpes, III:1440, 1443 with hemophilus infections, III:1586, 1587 inhalation therapies for, III:1838–1841 with jaundice, III:1882, III:1882, III:1883 jaundice in (See Neonatal jaundice) Legionnaires’ disease in, III:1972 with listeriosis, III:2012–2013 liver function tests for, III:2025–2027 massage for, III:1817–1819 with meningitis, III:2154, 2155 music therapy for, III:2271 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328–2330 sex change surgery for, IV:3011 shingles in, IV:3031 staphylococcal infections of, IV:3156 with stridor, IV:3193 with syphilis, IV:3220, 3228 therapeutic touch for, V:3282 with toxoplasmosis, V:3349 vitamin K deficiency in, V:3519 vitamin K for, V:3525 Newborn life support. See Newborn infants, inhalation therapies for Newborn screening for cystic fibrosis, II:988 for galactosemia, III:1378 for genetic disorders, III:1435–1436 Newton, Isaac as vegetarian, V:3485 NF. See Neurofibromatosis NF genes, IV:2344–2345 NF2 genes with acoustic neuroma, I:28, 30 NHL. See Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas NIAAA. See National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism Niacin, V:3525 antituberculosis drugs and, I:311 for atherosclerosis, I:396 with cholesterol tests, II:793 for Hartnup disease, III:1512 for high cholesterol, II:787, 788, 789, 791 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 vitamin toxicity from, V:3523 Niacin deficiency dementia from, II:1024 vs. Hartnup disease, III:1511 pellagra from, V:3525 from starvation, IV:3161 Niacinamide, for pellagra, IV:2516 Nicardipine with antimalarials, I:288 for hypertension, II:629 Nickel allergy to, in eyeglasses, II:1265, 1267 atopic dermatitis from, II:1037 physical allergy from, IV:2592 Niclocide. See Niclosamide Niclosamide for parasitic disease, I:273 for tapeworm disase, V:3241 Nicoderm. See Smoking cessation drugs Nicorette. See Smoking cessation drugs Nicotinamide for Hartnup disease, III:1512 vitamin toxicity from, V:3523 Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide methemoglobin reductase, I:287 Nicotine, IV:3103 addiction to, IV:3207 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with antimigraine agents, I:291 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2880–2881 ultrasonography for, II:1258 Nightguard. See Splints Nightmares insomnia from, III:1843 vs. night terrors, IV:2355 polysomnography for, IV:2668 from PTSD, IV:2686 sleep disorders from, IV:3091 Nightshade poisoning, IV:2644 NIHL. See Hearing loss Nilstat. See Nystatin Nimodipine for bipolar disorder, I:488 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202–3203 Nimotop. See Nimodipine Nipples in breast reconstruction, I:587, 588 in breast self-examination, I:592 in mastitis, III:2131 in Paget’s disease of the breast, IV:2457 stimulation of with contraction stress test, I:222 Nipride. See Nitroprusside sodium Niridazole G6PD and, III:1465 Nisoldipine with grapefruit juice, II:1102 Nissen, Hartwig, III:2125 Nitrate arsenic toxicity, III:2194 Nitrates for coronary heart disease, II:931 for diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1071 for heart attacks, III:1534 heartburn from, III:1553 for ischemia, III:1870 as migraine trigger, III:2188 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052, 3054 toxicity, III:2194–2195 with vasodilators, V:3484 See also Antiangina agents Nitrendipine with grapefruit juice, II:1102 Nitric oxide production of sildenafil citrate for, IV:3052, 3053 with yohimbe for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 Nitro-Bid. See Nitroglycerin Nitrocap. See Nitrates Nitrofurantoin for cystitis, II:993 G6PD and, III:1465 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 urinalysis and, V:3443 for urinary tract infections, V:3447–3449 Nitrofurazone with nitrofurantoin, V:3448 Nitrogen in cryotherapy, II:963 decompression sickness from, II:1008 in inert gas narcosis, IV:2356–2357 liquid (See Liquid nitrogen) narcosis (See Inert gas narcosis) Nitrogen mustard. See Mechlorethamine Nitroglycerin for angina pectoris, I:195, 229 with aspirin, I:379 for cardiac catheterization, II:657 for coronary heart disease, II:931 for dysmenorrhea, II:1117 for heart attacks, III:1534 for ischemia, III:1870 in MUGA scans, III:2233 for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Nitrolingual. See Nitroglycerin Nitroprusside sodium hypothyroidism from, III:1756 for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 tests for cystinuria, II:990 Nitrostat. See Nitroglycerin Nitrous oxide for general anesthesia, I:186, 187 for tooth extraction, V:3333 Nix. See Permethrin Nizatidine for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 Nizoral. See Ketoconazole Njovera. See Bejel NLP. See Neurolinguistic programming NMR. See Nuclear magnetic resonance NMS. See Neuroleptic malignant syndrome NNRTIs. See Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors No Doz. See Caffeine No touch technique for tumor removal, V:3416 Nocardia, IV:2358 Nocardia asteroides, IV:2358 Nocardiosis, IV:2357–2358 Nociceptors in migraine, III:2187 in pain, IV:2459–2460 Nocturnal enuresis. See Bed-wetting Nocturnal myoclonus in elderly, IV:2997, 3000 insomnia from, III:1843 3845 Nocturnal myoclonus with breastfeeding, III:1943 cluster headache from, II:824 conduct disorder from, II:883 dizziness from, II:1095 heartburn from, III:1553 in infertility, III:1833 insomnia from, III:1843 replacement therapy (See Smoking cessation drugs) with restless legs syndrome, IV:2872 substitutes for (See Smoking cessation drugs) See also Smoking Nicotine gum. See Smoking cessation drugs Nicotine inhaler. See Smoking cessation drugs Nicotine nasal spray. See Smoking cessation drugs Nicotine overdose with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 Nicotine patch. See Smoking cessation drugs Nicotine replacement therapy. See Smoking cessation drugs Nicotine substitution products. See Smoking cessation drugs Nicotinic acid diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 malnutrition from, III:2104 vitamin toxicity from, V:3523 See also Niacin Nicotrol. See Smoking cessation drugs NIDA. See National Institute on Drug Abuse NIDDM. See Noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus Niehans, Paul, II:686–687, 687 Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004, 2005, 2006 Nifedipine for achalasia, I:20 with antimalarials, I:288 for diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1071 with grapefruit juice, II:1102 for hypertension, I:279–281, II:629 as migraine trigger, III:2188 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for premature labor, IV:2701 for Raynaud’s syndrome, IV:2967 Night blindness from malnutrition, III:2104 from vitamin A deficiency, V:3512, 3524 Night terrors, IV:2355–2356, IV:3091 from PTSD, IV:2686 Night vision with isotretinoin, I:227 Nocturnal parozysmal hemoglobinuria Nocturnal paroxysmal hemoglobinuria. See Paroxysmal hemoglobinuria Nocturnal penile tumescence test for impotence, III:1805 Nodular lymphocytic predominance, III:1649 Nodular melanoma, III:2095 Nodules, IV:3075 NOFTT. See Failure to thrive Nogier, Paul, I:41 Noise hearing disorders from, II:838 loud hearing loss from, III:1528 Meniere’s disease from, III:2151 perforated eardrum from, IV:2534 tinnitus and, V:3322 Noise-induced hearing loss. See Hearing loss Nolvadex. See Tamoxifen Nominal aphasia. See Anomic aphasia Non-A, non-B hepatitis. See Hepatitis C Non-accidental trauma. See Abuse Non-adsorbable antacids, I:218 Non-cycle specific antineoplastic drugs, I:246 Non-food, eating of, IV:2595–2596 Non-glial brain tumors, I:570 Non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas, III:2092 chemotherapy for alemtuzumab, I:102 gallium scan for, III:1384 from Hodgkin’s disease, III:1649 lymphography for, III:2066 radiation therapy for, IV:2810 Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3543–3547 Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. See Diabetes mellitus Non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3066–3068 Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, IV:2358–2359 for AIDS, I:80, 303–304 Non-productive pain, I:174 Non-REM sleep, III:1843 in sleep disorders, IV:3088 Non-small cell lung cancer, III:2043–2046, III:2053 Non-tropical sprue. See Celiac disease Non-union fracture. See Fractures Noncholera vibrio. See Vibriosis Noncommunicating hydrocephalus. See Hydrocephalus Nondirected analysis. See Psychoanalysis Nondisjunction in Down syndrome, II:1098 Nonerosive H. pylori gastritis, III:1405–1406 3846 Nonessential amino acids. See Amino acids Nonfunctional pancreatic cancer, IV:2471, 2472 Nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2359–2361, 2360 from Chlamydia trachomatis, II:771 Nongranulomatous uveitis, V:3461 Nonhemolytic streptococci nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 Nonhereditary genetic defects. See Birth defects Noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus chronic kidney failure from, II:806 ketoacidosis and, II:1055 from obesity, IV:2378 senior’s health and, IV:2996 Nonmechanical obstruction. See Ileus; Intestinal obstruction Nonorganic failure to thrive. See Failure to thrive Nonoxynyl-9 for contraception, II:911 Nonproliferative retinopathy. See Retinopathy Nonseminoma tumors, V:3256 Nonspecific febrile illness. See Summer grippe Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, IV:2361–2363 with acetaminophen, I:19 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:136, 138 anaphylaxis from, I:179 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 anxiety from, I:318 with aspirin, I:379 with bleeding time test, I:514 bruises from, I:608 for bursitis, I:621 for carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668, 669 for cervical disk disease, II:718 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:803 for costochondritis, II:940 delirium from, II:1021 digestive ulcers from, V:3432, 3433 for dysmenorrhea, II:1117, III:2171 edema from, II:1134 for endometriosis, II:1194 after eye muscle surgery, II:1269 for familial polyposis, II:1287 for FUO, II:1318 gastritis and, III:1405, 1408 for gout, I:282, III:1477, 1479 guaiac test strips and, II:1302, 1303 after hysterosonography, III:1769 indigestion from, III:1813 for infectious arthritis, III:1820 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 kidney damage from, IV:2337, 2338 leukocytosis from, III:1993 for low back pain, III:2032–2033 mastocytosis from, III:2132 for migraines, III:2188 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 for osteoarthritis, IV:2413 overhydration from, IV:2449 for Paget’s disease, IV:2456 for pain, I:174–175 for pain management, IV:2462, 2464 for palliative cancer therapy, II:642 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 peptic ulcers from, V:3432, 3433 for pericarditis, IV:2539 photosensitivity from, III:1715 platelet aggregation test and, IV:2623 for polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2666 for prostatitis, IV:2741 psoriatic arthritis and, IV:2759 for Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2852 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, 307, IV:2901 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for sciatica, IV:2964 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 with small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 for spinal stenosis, IV:3136 for stenosing tenosynovitis, V:3392 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for temporal arteritis, V:3248 for tennis elbow, V:3252 with terazosin, I:130–131 for TMJ, V:3250 for tonsillitis, V:3328 for trichinosis, V:3386 for yersiniosis, V:3593 Nonstress test, I:221–223 Nonsyncope nonvertigo. See Dizziness Nonulcer dyspepsia. See Indigestion Noradrenaline. See Norepinephrine Nordette. See Oral contraceptives Norepinephrine adrenal gland scan for, I:60–61 with antidepressants, I:256, 257 in autonomic dysreflexia, IV:3129 catecholamines tests for, II:677 in glucose production, III:1734 in hypoglycemia, III:1734 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 in mood disorders, III:2216 in Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 Norethindrone acetate for amenorrhea, III:2171 Norflex. See Orphenadrine Norfloxacin GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Nose cancer nasal packing for, IV:2314 nosebleed from, IV:2364 Nose diseases with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 nasal packing for, IV:2313–2314 neuralgia from, IV:2339 Nose drops decongestant, II:1011–1012 for otitis media, IV:2435 Nosebleed, IV:2364 from hemorrhagic fevers, III:1591, 1592 from hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777, 1778 ipecac for, III:1857 laser surgery for, III:1960 nasal packing for, IV:2313–2314 from nasal trauma, IV:2317, 2318 Nosocomial infections. See Cross infection Notoginseng for atherosclerosis, I:396 Novadex. See Tamoxifen Novafed. See Decongestants Novantrone for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 Novel antipsychotic agents. See Atypical antipsychotic agents Novello, Antonia, III:2200 Novocain. See Procaine NREM. See Non-REM sleep NRTIs. See Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors NSABP. See National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project NSAIDS. See Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents NSE. See Neurologic examination NST. See Nonstress test Nubain for childbirth, II:757 Nuclear magnetic resonance for high cholesterol, II:787 vs. MRI, III:2082 for priapism, IV:2715 Nuclear reactor accidents, IV:2808 Nuclear scan. See Radionuclide imaging Nucleic acid amplification tests, I:525 Nucleoside analogs. See Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, I:303–304 for AIDS, I:80 vs. reverse transcriptase inhibitors, IV:2359 Nucleus accumbens cocaine and, II:832 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Nucleus polyps chemonucleolysis of, II:738–739 with herniated disk, III:1627, 1628 Nulliparity endometrial cancer and, II:1189 lesbian health and, III:1415 Num-Zit. See Dental anesthetics Numbness, IV:2364–2366 cryoglobulin test for, II:961 electromyography for, II:1159 from fluoroquinolones, II:1345, 1346 for impacted tooth, III:1799–1800 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 Nummular dermatitis. See Dermatitis Numorphan for childbirth, II:757 Nung, Shen, I:348 Nuprin. See Ibuprofen Nursing (Infant). See Breastfeeding Nursing bottle caries. See Bottle mouth caries Nursing home-acquired infections antibiotic-associated colitis as, I:238 Nursing homes for Alzheimer’s patients, I:139 for dementia, II:1026 for fecal incontinence, II:1300 infection control for, III:1822 for mental retardation, III:2173 protein-energy malnutrition and, IV:2743 Nutrasweet. See Aspartame Nutrition, IV:2367–2369 alcoholic hepatitis and, III:1598 in Alzheimer’s disease, I:137, 138 amblyopia and, I:141 in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:166, IV:3122 for brain tumors, I:574 celiac disease and, II:681, 683 for children, II:764 cleft lip and palate and, II:819 common cold and, II:869 with congenital heart disease, II:902 for Crohn’s disease, II:959 for cystic fibrosis, II:988 for delirium, II:1022 drug metabolism and, II:1102 for elderly, I:69, 70–71 for emphysema, II:1174 enteral (See Enteral nutrition) fracture repair and, II:1361 gay and lesbian health and, III:1414, 1415, 1416 for Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 HRT and, III:1673 intravenous (See Intravenous therapy) liver cirrhosis and, II:816 liver function and, III:1883 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 3847 Nutrition for bacterial infections, II:1344–1345, 1346 nalidixic acid and, V:3448 Norgestrel for amenorrhea, III:2171 Norlutate. See Norethindrone acetate Norlutin. See Progestins Normal pressure hydrocephalus. See Hydrocephalus Normal tension glaucoma. See Glaucoma Normochromic anemia red blood cell indices for, IV:2838–2839 Normocytic anemia red blood cell indices for, IV:2838, 2839 Normodyne. See Labetolol Noroxin. See Norfloxacin Norpace. See Disopyramide Norplant, II:1031–1032 for contraception, II:911 Norpramin. See Desipramine Norpramine. See Desipramine North American blastomycosis vs. South American blastomycosis, IV:3121 See also Blastomycosis Nortriptyline, I:256 for depression, I:258, II:1034 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 with MAO inhibitors, II:1102 overdose, II:1104 Norvasc. See Amlopidine Norvir. See Ritonavir Norwalk virus food poisoning from, II:1353 gastroenteritis from, III:1408 travelers diarrhea from, V:3379 Norwegian scabies. See Scabies Nose abnormalities of deviated septum from, II:1045 from nasal trauma, IV:2317, 2318 septoplasty for, IV:3006 bleed (See Nosebleed) blowing nosebleed from, IV:2364 broken, III:2135, 2136–2137 in hypophysectomy, III:1745 injuries of nasal irrigation for, IV:2312 septoplasty for, IV:3006 lesions from leishmaniasis, III:1975 mucormycosis of, III:2231 physical examination of, IV:2593 picking nasal packing for, IV:2314 nosebleed from, IV:2364 surgery of, IV:2904–2905 Nutrition counseling for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for muscular dystrophy, III:2267 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 for palpitations, IV:2466 for Parkinson disease, IV:2501 for phenylketonuria, IV:2577 for pigmentation disorders, IV:3078 with plasmapheresis, IV:2619 for porphyria, IV:2674 during pregnancy, IV:2386, 2698 prepregnancy counseling on, IV:2712 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for scoliosis, IV:2972 for senior’s health, IV:2996, 2998, 2999 for stings, I:503 for stomatitis, IV:3170, 3171 vegetarianism and, V:3486 Nutrition counseling for FTT, II:1279 Nutrition disorders pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 rashes from, IV:2821 Nutritional cirrhosis. See Liver cirrhosis Nutritional deficiencies. See Malnutrition Nutritional supplements. See Dietary supplements Nutritional therapy. See Diet therapy Nux vomica for food poisoning, II:1356 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 for indigestion, III:1814 for insomnia, IV:3092 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for sinusitis, IV:3059 nvCJD. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Nydrazid. See Isoniazid Nyhan, William, III:1983 Nystagmus, IV:2371–2372 from albinism, I:90, 91 from congenital brain defects, II:891 eye muscle surgery for, II:1269 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 in Meniere’s disease, III:2152 from multiple sclerosis, III:2251 optokinetic (See Optokinetic nystagmus) from Refsum disease, III:2004 Nystatin for candidiasis, II:646 for cross infection, III:1675 O OA. See Osteoarthritis OAS. See Overt Aggression Scale Oat-cell cancer. See Small cell lung cancer 3848 Oatmeal for chickenpox, II:750–751 for contact dermatitis, V:3281 for dermatitis, II:1038 for hives, III:1643 for itching, III:1875 for psoriasis, IV:2758 for shingles, IV:3032 for skin lesions, IV:3076 for sunburn, IV:3218 Oats for menopause, III:2162 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 for panic disorder, IV:2483 Obesity, IV:2373–2378, 2375f, 2377t amenorrhea from, I:146 with angina pectoris, I:195 in atherosclerosis, I:394 with binge eating disorder, I:481–482 with bone biopsy, I:539 with breast reconstruction, I:586 cancer and, II:632, 637 carpal tunnel syndrome and, II:667 carpal tunnel syndrome from, II:667 catecholamines levels with, II:677 chemonucleolysis and, II:739 coccyx injuries from, II:836 cortisol test for, II:938 decompression sickness and, II:1009 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 Depo-Provera with, II:1031 diabetes mellitus from, II:1048, 1049 diagnosis of, III:2201 dyspnea from, IV:3036 embolism from, II:1169 endometrial cancer and, II:1188, 1191 ethnic differences in, III:2199 exercise for, II:1249 fatty liver from, II:1298 flesh-eating disease with, II:1337 fracture repair and, II:1361 gallstones from, III:1388 gas embolism from, II:1169 with gastrostomy, III:1411 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 heart attacks from, III:1533, 1535 heartburn from, III:1553 with Heimlich maneuver, III:1565 hernias from, III:1623 high cholesterol and, II:786 with hirsutism, III:1637 hypercholesterolemia from, III:1699 with hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1707, 1708 with hypertension, II:930 in hypothyroidism, III:1756 with hysterectomy, III:1762 jaw fixation for, III:1885 with kidney cancer, III:1909 low back pain from, III:2031 in men, III:2165 myocardial ischemia from, III:1869 Pickwickian syndrome from, IV:2597–2598 with plastic surgery, IV:2621 postmenopausal bleeding and, IV:2680 from Prader-Willi syndrome, IV:2688, 2689 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 senior’s health and, IV:2996 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 SSRIs for, IV:2990 with stroke, IV:3195 surgery for, IV:2378–2380, 2379f with TIA, V:3371 tracheotomy and, V:3355 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 with vagotomy, V:3470 varicose veins from, V:3476 Object relations orientation dance therapy. See Dance therapy Objective tinnitus. See Tinnitus Oblique fractures. See Fracture lines Obscene language in oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2397 Obsessive-compulsive disorder, I:322, 323, IV:2380–2383, IV:2564–2567 bilateral cingulotomy for, IV:2770 bulimia and, I:612 in children, II:762 cognitive therapy for, II:840 with constipation, III:1963 vs. anorexia nervosa, I:212 PET scan for, IV:2677 pica and, IV:2595 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 with somatoform disorders, IV:3116 SSRIs for, IV:2990 from Tourette syndrome, V:3341, 3342–3343, 3344 tricyclic antidepressants for, I:258 Obstetrical emergencies, IV:2382– IV:2386 See also Pregnancy Obstructive jaundice. See Jaundice Obstructive renal artery disease. See Renal Artery Obstruction Obstructive sleep apnea, IV:3083, 3112 See also Sleep apnea Occipital lobe in craniotomy, II:946 Occipital neuralgia, IV:2339 Occlusion therapy for amblyopia, I:142 Occlusional bites, I:498 Occult blood fecal, II:1302–1303 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 OCD. See Obsessive-compulsive disorder OCG. See Gallbladder x-rays Octamide. See Metoclopramide Octreotide for acromegaly, I:34 Octreotide acetate for bleeding varices, I:517 for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 Ocular albinism, I:88 Ocular cancer. See Eye cancer Ocular convergence eye movement examination for, II:1263 vision training for, V:3508 Ocular divergence vision training for, V:3508 Ocular myopathy, IV:2394 Ocular onchocerciasis, V:3510 Ocular refraction test for hyperopia, III:1712 Ocular rosacea. See Rosacea Oculocerebrorenal syndrome Fanconi’s syndrome from, II:1290 renal tubular acidosis from, IV:2858 Oculocutaneous albinism, I:88 Oculoglandular tularemia, V:3411 Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267 Ocupress. See Cartelol Oenothera biennis. See Evening primrose Office of Alternative Medicine, I:43 Ofloxacin for bacterial infections, II:1344, 1346 for chancroid, II:730 for gonorrhea, III:1473 nalidixic acid and, V:3448 OFTT. See Failure to thrive Ohio Valley disease. See Histoplasmosis Oil enema, in bowel training, I:565 Ointments for eye infections, I:243 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for rash, IV:2821 after skin resurfacing, IV:3080 Olanzapine, for psychosis, I:300, 301, 302, IV:2766 Oleander poisoning, IV:2644 Olfactory bulbs, in smelling disorders, IV:3098, 3099 Olfactory hallucinations. See Dysosmia Olfactory nerve testing, IV:3100 Olfactory nerves, I:215, IV:3098 Olfactory system disorders. See Smelling disorders Oligodendrocytes, IV:2720 Oligohydramnios, II:1238, IV:2663–2665 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Oligomenorrhea, III:2169, IV:2388–2390 vs. postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2679 Oliguria, from APSGN, I:48 Olive oil, for constipation, II:907 Oliver, T.H., IV:2450 Omega-3 fatty acids, IV:2367 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for dysmenorrhea, III:2172 for sarcomas, IV:2944–2945 Omega-3 oil for cerumen, III:1530 for costochondritis, II:940 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 Omega-6 fatty acids, IV:2367 Omeprazole for gastrinomas, III:1404 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for hiatal hernias, III:1624 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for stomach ulcers, I:308 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 for ulcers, I:314 Omnipen. See Ampicillin On-the-body hearing aids, III:1526 Onchocerca volvulus, II:1330 Onchocerciasis antihelminthic drugs for, I:273 from filariasis, II:1330 visual impairment from, V:3510 Oncogenes, III:1436–1437 See also Cancer Oncovin. See Vincristine Ondansetron, for nausea, II:642, 643, 644, 742, IV:2812 Ondine’s curse. See Sleep apnea One-day surgery. See Ambulatory surgery Oninase. See Tolbutamide Onions for atherosclerosis, I:396 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 ONTT. See Optic neuritis treatment trial Onycho-osteodysplasia. See Nail-patella syndrome Onycholysis, nail removal for, IV:2309 Onychomycosis, I:270, III:1929, IV:2390–2394 Oocysts, toxoplasmosis from, V:3348 Oocyte donation, IV:2703 Oophorectomy, IV:2392–2394 for breast cancer, II:635 for ovarian cancer, IV:2441, 2442 for ovarian cysts, IV:2446 salpingo- (See Salpingo-oophorectomy) Open adrenalectomy. See Adrenalectomy 3849 Open adrenalectomy Occult hyperthyroidism. See Hyperthyroidism Occupational diseases anthrax, I:223–225 asthma as, IV:2386–2388, 2386t cancer as, II:633 lead poisoning, III:1740, 1965 sporotrichosis, IV:3143 Occupational exposure to asbestos, I:369–370, 371 asthma from, I:380, IV:2386–2388 bladder cancer from, I:507 extrinsic allergic alveolitis from, III:1717 heavy metal poisoning from, III:1560–1561 kidney damage from, IV:2337 lung cancer and, III:2044 lung cancer from, III:2047 lung diseases from, III:2050 manganese toxicity from, III:2195 melioidosis from, III:2150–2151 multiple chemical sensitivity from, III:2235 multiple myeloma from, III:2239 osteoarthritis from, IV:2412 pancreatic cancer from, IV:2474, 2477 paresthesia from, IV:2365 pulmonary fibrosis from, III:1773, 1774, 1775 silicosis from, IV:3055, 3056 zinc toxicity from, III:2194 Occupational hazards. See Industrial safety Occupational injuries CO poisoning, II:651 low back pain from, III:2031 traumatic amputations as, V:3377 Occupational licensing. See Certification and Licensing Occupational noise hearing loss from, III:1528 Occupational Safety and Health Administration on CO poisoning, II:651 on silicosis, IV:3056 Occupational therapy, IV:2846, 2847 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 for brain tumors, I:574 for burns, I:618–619 for congenital amputation, II:888 for Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1370 for low back pain, III:2032 for mental retardation, III:2175 for movement disorders, III:2222 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for paralysis, IV:2492 for pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2569 for sensory integration disorder, IV:3003 Open-angle glaucoma Open-angle glaucoma. See Glaucoma Open biopsy. See Bone biopsy Open cholecystectomy. See Cholecystectomy Open fracture reduction. See Fracture reduction Open fractures. See Fractures Open-heart surgery. See Thoracic surgery Ophthalmia neonatorum from chlamydial pneumoniae, IV:2540 Ophthalmic anesthetics, I:191, 192 Ophthalmic antibiotics, I:243–244 with cataract surgery, II:672 for keratitis, III:1906 Ophthalmic lenses. See Eyeglasses Ophthalmic surgery. See Eye surgery Ophthalmic ultrasonography, II:1258–1260 Ophthalmoplegia, IV:2394–2396 Ophthalmoplegia plus. See Ocular myopathy Ophthalmoscopy, II:1263 for detached retina, IV:2877 for glaucoma, III:1459 hypertension and, III:1722 for hyphema, III:1728 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 with orbital x-rays, V:3586 for retinal artery occlusion, IV:2875 Opiate blockers, for autism, I:420 Opiates. See Narcotics Opioid analgesics, I:175–178, I:175t gender differences and, IV:2573 with hydroxyzine, I:285 substance abuse and, IV:3207 Opioids. See Narcotics Opisthorchiasis, II:1342 Opisthorchis felineus, II:1342 Opisthorchis viverrini, II:1342 Opium, for Crohn’s disease, II:959 Opportunistic infections in AIDS, I:76–78, 80, 84, 85 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 alemtuzumab and, I:102, 103 bacillary angiomatosis as, I:434–435 Kaposi’s sarcoma as, III:1899 with liver transplantation, III:2030 mucormycosis as, III:2231 from mycobacteria, III:2276 pneumocystis pneumonia as, IV:2636 progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy as, IV:2720 pseudomonas infections as, IV:2750 Oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2396–2398 Optic atrophy, IV:2372, IV:2398–2400 Optic disk, in retinal vein occlusion, IV:2878 3850 Optic nerve damage to from glaucoma, III:1457–1459, 1461 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 from ventricular shunts, V:3503 visual evoked potentials for, II:1248 ophthalmoscopy for, II:1263 with phototherapy, IV:2331 in retinal vein occlusion, IV:2878, 2879 in subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3200 swelling of, IV:2488 tumors of papilledema from, IV:2488 Optic nerve head pallor. See Optic atrophy Optic neuritis, IV:2400–2401 from multiple sclerosis, III:2251 optic atrophy from, IV:2398 Optic neuritis treatment trial, IV:2400 Optic neuropathy, IV:2398–2399 Optic vesicle defect, III:2185 Optimine. See Azatadine OPTN, on kidney transplantation, III:1921 Optokinetic motion sickness. See Motion sickness Optokinetic nystagmus, IV:2371 Optokinetic system in motion sickness, III:2218 OPV. See Sabin vaccine Oraflex. See Benoxaprofen Orajel. See Dental anesthetics Oral cancer. See Mouth cancer Oral candidiasis, II:645, 646 Oral chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Oral cholecystogram. See Gallbladder x-rays Oral cholecystography. See Cholecystography Oral contraceptives, II:911, IV:2401–2405 with acetaminophen, I:19 for acne, I:26 alanine aminotransferase levels from, III:2024 with aldosterone test, I:101 amenorrhea and, I:147, III:2171 with antibiotics, II:1102 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 anxiety from, I:318 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 bilirubin levels from, III:2024 Budd-Chiari syndrome from, I:610 with cephalosporins, II:694 cerebral aneurysm from, II:698 cervical cancer from, II:716 cholestasis with, II:783 with cholesterol tests, II:793 cortisol test with, II:937 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 dysmenorrhea and, II:1117, III:2171 embolism from, II:1169 endometrial cancer and, II:1191 for endometriosis, II:1194 erythema nodosum from, II:1227 with face lift, II:1275 with fibrinogen test, II:1320 for fibrocystic condition of breast, II:1325 galactorrhea from, III:1375 gallstones with, II:779, III:1388 gamma-glutamyl transferase levels from, III:2024 with haptoglobin test, III:1510 headache from, III:1523 hemolytic uremic syndrome from, III:1580 for hirsutism, III:1637 hyperaldosteronism from, III:1695 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788 indigestion from, III:1813 lesbian health and, III:1415 liver cancer from, III:2019 for menopause, III:2162 for menorrhagia, III:2171 as migraine trigger, III:2188 morning after pills, I:9–10, IV:2819 for oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 ovarian cancer and, IV:2440 for ovarian cysts, IV:2446 for PCOS, IV:2655 with penicillins, IV:2529 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 photosensitivity from, III:1715 with plasma renin activity, IV:2617 prepregnancy counseling on, IV:2712 prolactin test and, IV:2723 protein components test and, IV:2745 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 smoking and, IV:3104 with stroke, IV:3195–3196 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 with tetracyclines, V:3267 thrombophlebitis from, V:3300 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3310, 3312 thyroxine levels and, V:3310, 3312 with triglycerides tests, V:3394 triiodothyronine levels and, V:3310 with vulvovaginitis, V:3540 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from maxillofacial trauma, III:2136, 2137 x-rays for, V:3587 Orbital tumors exophthalmos from, II:1252 Orbital x-rays, V:3586–3588 Orchidopexy for testicular torsion, V:3263 for undescended testes, V:3437 Orchiectomy hypogonadism from, III:1738 for prostate cancer, II:635, IV:2733 for testicular cancer, V:3258 Orchiopexy. See Orchidopexy Orchitis, III:2167, IV:2408–2409 in mumps, III:2255–2256 Orciprenaline. See Metaproterenol Oregon grape for onychomycosis, IV:2391 for psoriasis, IV:2757–2758 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 Organ donation autopsy and, I:425 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease from, II:951 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 living donors (See Living donors) Organ Procurement and Transplant Network, III:1921 Organ rejection from cytomegalovirus infections, II:998 vs. graft vs. host disease, III:1482 HLA DNA probes for, III:1680–1681 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795, 1796 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 with kidney transplantation, III:1922 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 with liver transplantation, III:2029–2030 with lung transplantation, III:2054–2056 from pancreatic transplantation, IV:2468 Organ system, acupuncture and, I:42 Organ transplantation with candidiasis, II:646 with cellulitis, II:684 with cytomegalovirus infections, II:998 cytomegalovirus infections from, II:1000 death and, II:1005 delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1019 with fifth disease, II:1329 for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 graft vs. host disease with, III:1481 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 HLA DNA probes for, III:1680–1681 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795 with infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 with mucormycosis, III:2231 with pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 with septic shock, IV:3005 with staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, IV:3160 See also specific organs Organic failure to thrive. See Failure to thrive Organophosphates, III:1841–1842 Orgasm disorder (See Orgasmic disorder) after sex change surgery, IV:3011 Orgasmic disorder in women, II:1308, IV:3015, 3016 Oriental sore. See Cutaneous leishmaniasis Orientation assesment, IV:2351 Orinase. See Tolbutamide Ornidyl. See Eflornithine Ornish, Dean, V:3487 Ornish diet, V:3487 Ornithine in cystinuria, II:990 Ornithosis. See Parrot fever Orofacial myofunctional disorder speech disorders from, IV:3122–3125 Orofaciodigital syndromes, IV:2661 Orogastric tubes. See Nasoenteral tubes Oropharyngeal cancer, III:1515–1519 Oropharyngeal tularemia, V:3411 Oropharynx in laryngitis, III:1957 Oroya fever. See Bartonellosis Orphenadrine as muscle relaxant, III:2259 ORS. See Oral rehydration solutions Ortho-Novum. See Oral contraceptives Ortho-Tri-Cyclen. See Oral contraceptives Orthoclone OKT3. See Muromonab CD3 Orthodontic appliances for malocclusion, III:2106–2107 Orthodontic retainers for malocclusion, III:2107 Orthodontics, II:939 for malocclusion, III:2106–2107 for osteopetroses, IV:2424 tooth extraction for, V:3332 Orthopedic braces for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for fractures, II:1365 for immobilization, III:1781 for kyphosis, III:1932 3851 Orthopedic braces Oral examination. See Dental examination Oral glucose tolerance test. See Blood glucose tests Oral herpes. See Cold sore Oral hygiene, IV:2405–2407 actinomycosis and, I:35 antimalarials and, I:287 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 for bad breath, I:437 with braces, III:2107 with chest physical therapy, II:746 for dentures, V:3335 for dry mouth, II:1110 dysosmia from, IV:3099 for enteral nutrition, V:3401 for head and neck cancer prevention, III:1519 with immunologic deficiency syndromes, III:1791 immunologic diseases and, III:1787 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1799 for lichen planus, III:1997 lung abscess from, III:2038 mumps and, III:2255 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 pyrimethamine and, I:287 for Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3064 for stomatitis, IV:3170 with sulfonamides, IV:3216 for toothache prevention, V:3337 Oral infections. See Mouth diseases Oral intercourse gonorrhea from, III:1472 Oral polio vaccine. See Sabin vaccine Oral rehydration solutions for dehydration, II:1017, 1018 for diarrhea, II:1067 for E. coli infections, II:1237 for food poisoning, II:1355, 1356 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 for rotaviruses, IV:2922 for travelers diarrhea, V:3379 Oral sensory perception in speech disorders, IV:3123 Oral surgery bio-oxidative therapies for, IV:2451 for malocclusion, III:2107 opioid analgesics for, I:175 for periodontal diseases, IV:2548 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 Oral systemicpreparations, I:119 Oral ulcers. See Mouth ulcers Orange root. See Goldenseal Orap. See Pimozide Orasone. See Prednisone Orbit in exophthalmos, II:1252 ultrasonography of, II:1258–1260 Orbital cellulitis, II:684, 1271, IV:2407–2408 Orbital fractures Orthopedic braces Milwaukee for kyphosis, III:1932 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 neck for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 for postpolio syndrome, IV:2684 for scoliosis, IV:2972, 2973 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 with spinal instrumentation, IV:3134 for spinal stenosis, IV:3137 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 for torticollis, V:3341 Orthopedic equipment for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 Orthopedic footwear for leprosy, III:1979 Orthopedic injuries rehabilitation for, IV:2846, 2847 Orthopedic surgery, IV:2409–2411 deep vein thrombosis after, II:1013 pulmonary embolism and, II:1169 for scoliosis, IV:2972 for sprains and strains sports-related, IV:3146 Orthoptics. See Vision training Orthoses. See Orthotic devices Orthostatic hypotension, III:1752, IV:2411 hyperaldosteronism from, III:1695 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 from SSRIs, IV:2991 Orthotic devices for bunions, I:615 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for heel spurs, III:1563 Orthotopic transplantation. See Liver transplantation Orthovoltage rays in radiation therapy, II:639 Ortolani test for congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 Orudis. See Ketoprofen OSA. See Obstructive sleep apnea Oscillococcinum for influenza, III:1835 Oseltamivir for viral infections, I:315 OSHA. See Occupational Safety and Health Administration Osha root for sore throats, IV:3120 for strep throat, IV:3179 for tonsillitis, V:3328 Osler-Weber-Rendu disease. See Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia Osler’s disease. See Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia Osmolar concentration, II:1046 Osmotherapy, I:444 3852 Ossicular chain, II:1123 Osteitis deformans. See Paget’s disease of bone Osteoarthritis, IV:2412–2415, 2413f acetaminophen for, I:174 arthroplasty for, I:361 cervical (See Cervical osteoarthritis) vs. Charcot’s joints, II:736 cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitors for, IV:2901 from Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, II:1138 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 fainting from, II:1280 from infectious arthritis, III:1820 in the knee, II:796 senior’s health and, IV:2996, 2999, 3000, 3001 spinal stenosis from, IV:3136 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1890 therapeutic touch for, V:3283 Osteoarthrosis. See Osteoarthritis Osteoblasts, I:544 Osteochondritis dissecans, IV:2416 Osteochondromas, IV:2942 Osteochondroses, IV:2415–2416 Osteoclasts, I:544 in multiple myeloma, III:2239, 2240 Osteoconduction for bone defects, I:544 Osteocytes, I:544 Osteogenesis for bone defects, I:544 Osteogenesis imperfecta, IV:2416–2419 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 fractures from, II:1363 x-rays for, I:557 Osteogenic sarcoma. See Osteosarcomas Osteoinduction for bone defects, I:544 Osteolytic lesions, III:2238, 2239, 2241 Osteomalacia from cholestasis, II:785 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 from laxatives, III:1964 from vitamin D deficiency, IV:3161, V:3515, 3516 x-rays for, I:557 Osteomyelitis, IV:2419–2421 with amyloidosis, I:161 bone biopsy for, I:538 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 from clenched fist injury, II:820 from decubitus ulcer, I:458 from impetigo, III:1802 from melioidosis, III:2150 from salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 skull x-rays for, IV:3083 vs. sporotrichosis, IV:3143 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 traction and, V:3357 x-rays for, I:557 Osteonecrosis from fracture repair, II:1361 Osteopathic medicine. See Osteopathy Osteopathy, IV:2421–2423, 2422 for sciatica, IV:2964 Osteopetrosis, IV:2423–2425, 2424 Osteophytes. See Bone spurs Osteoporosis, IV:2425–2429, 2427 from amenorrhea, I:147 from anorexia nervosa, I:212 bone biopsy for, I:538 bone density scan for, I:540 bone disorder agents for, I:542 from calcium deficiency, III:2191, 2193 calcium for, III:2196, 2197 calcium salts for, I:218 from celiac disease, II:682 from cholestasis, II:785 exercise for preventing, II:1249 fractures from, II:1363, 1366 from gonadotropin releasing hormone agonists, V:3459 HRT for, III:1670, 1672 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1714 from immunosuppressive drugs, III:1922 from Klinefelter syndrome, III:1927 kyphosis from, III:1932 magnesium and, III:2078 menopause and, III:2159, 2160 MRI for, III:2082 from multiple myeloma, III:2239 from oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 oophorectomy and, IV:2392 pelvic fractures with, IV:2520 pharmacogenetics and, IV:2574 from phytoestrogens, IV:2711 with premature menopause, IV:2703 raloxifene for, III:2161 from reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2840 from rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2899 with salpingo-oophorectomy, IV:2939 scoliosis and, IV:2973 senior’s health and, IV:2996–2998, 3000 with spinal instrumentation, IV:3134 from steroids, II:958 with testosterone replacement therapy, III:2162 from Wilson disease, V:3567 in women, V:3576, 3577 x-rays for, I:557 Osteosarcoma bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 sarcomas, IV:2941–2945 Osteosarcomas, IV:2942–2945 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Outpatient care. See Ambulatory care Outpatient surgery. See Ambulatory surgery Ovarian cancer, II:631, 632, 633, 634, IV:2439–2444, 2443f alpha fetoprotein with, I:127 alpha-fetoproteins test for, V:3258 amylase tests for, I:160 bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy for, IV:2937 bone marrow transplantation for, I:550 with breastfeeding, III:1943 CA-125 antigen in, V:3413 carcinoid tumors and, IV:2343 from choriocarcinoma, II:797 corticotropin levels and, I:65 endometrial cancer and, II:1188–1189 galactorrhea from, III:1375 genetic testing for, III:1437 hirsutism from, III:1637 hysterectomy for, III:1760, 1761 laparoscopy for, III:1947 lesbian health and, III:1415 oophorectomy for, IV:2392 pap smear for, IV:2484 sex hormone tests for, IV:3014 susceptibility testing for, III:1437 ultrasonography for, IV:2525 Ovarian cysts, IV: 2445–2447, 2445 2446f with endometriosis, II:1194 FSH test for, II:1350 with infertility drugs, III:1831 laparoscopy for, III:1947 laser surgery for, III:1960 with Norplant, II:1032 with oral contraceptives, III:2098, IV:2401 ovarian torsion from, IV:2448 PCOS and, IV:2655 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 Ovarian diseases amenorrhea from, III:2169 FSH test for, II:1350 sitz bath for, IV:3061 Ovarian pregnancy. See Ectopic pregnancy Ovarian removal. See Oophorectomy Ovarian surgery for amenorrhea, I:147 for PCOS, IV:2656 for PMS, IV:2710 premature menopause from, IV:2702 Ovarian torsion, IV:2447–2448 Ovarian tumor amenorrhea from, I:147 Ovariectomy. See Oophorectomy Ovaries in ectopic pregnancy, II:1130 in hermaphroditism, III:1847 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in hypogonadism, III:1737 menopause and, III:2159 in oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 radiation injuries to, IV:2808 rupture of from in vitro fertilization, III:1810 surgery of, IV:2938–2939 Ovcon. See Oral contraceptives Over-the-counter drugs drug interactions with, II:1102–1104 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 with glaucoma, III:1461 for heartburn, III:1554 for keratosis pilaris, III:1907 for motion sickness, III:2219 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 Overactive neurogenic bladder. See Neurogenic bladder Overactive thyroid. See Hyperthyroidism Overbite. See Malocclusion Overdose. See Drug overdose Overeating. See Hyperphagia Overflow incontinence. See Urinary incontinence Overhead arm traction, V:3357 Overhydration, IV:2448–2449 antidiuretic hormone test for, I:266 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 Overnutrition. See Malnutrition Oversleeping as migraine trigger, III:2188 Overt Aggression Scale, II:883 Overtime. See Caffeine Overuse injuries. See Repetition strain injury Overweight. See Body weight; Obesity Ovrel. See Norgestrel Ovulation in birth control, IV:2401 in contraception, II:911, 1031 in infertility, III:1830, 1832 infertility and, III:1827–1828 from infertility drugs, III:1809 luteinizing hormone and, III:2056–2057 in multiple pregnancy, III:2247, 2248 in oligomenorrhea, IV:2388–2389 in PMS, IV:2710 tests for, IV:3013 Ovum implantation in contraception, II:911, 1031 in vitro fertilization, III:1808–1809 Oxacillin, I:240 Oxalosis chronic kidney failure from, II:806 Oxamniquine 3853 Oxamniquine Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 Osteosclerosis stapedectomy for, IV:3154 Osteosclerosis fragilis. See Osteopetrosis Ostomy, IV:2429–2430, V:3451, 3452 for bladder cancer, I:508 education, II:863 jejunum (See Jejunostomy) large intestine (See Colostomy) for necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 sepsis from, IV:3004 small intestine (See Ileostomy) with urinary diversion, V:3451–3452 Ostomy tubes bacteremia from, I:436 OTC. See Over-the-counter drugs Otic solutions. See Ear drops Otitis externa, IV:2431–2433, 2431 Otitis media, IV:2433–2436, 2434f from achondroplasia, I:22 adenoid hyperplasia from, I:55 brain abscess from, I:566 with cerumen impaction, II:710 CNS infections from, II:690 with effusion, III:2304–2305 erythromycins for, II:1232 hearing loss from, III:1528 from hemophilus infections, III:1587 labyrinthitis from, III:1935–1936 mastoidectomy for, III:2133 with mastoiditis, III:2134 from nasal packing, IV:2314 from perforated eardrum, IV:2534 roman chamomile for, I:349 from SCID, IV:3010 sulfonamides for, IV:3216 surgery for, II:1123 from Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 Otomycosis from aspergillosis, I:375 Otoplasty, IV:2621 Otorrhea from middle ear ventilation, III:2305 Otosclerosis, IV:2436–2437 deafness loss from, III:1528 surgery for, II:1122 Otoscopy, II:1121–1122 before audiometry, I:415 for cerumen impaction, II:710 for otitis media, IV:2434 for perforated eardrum, IV:2534 for tinnitus, V:3323 Ototoxicity, IV:2437–2439 Out-of-phase biopsy, II:1187 Outbreaks (Disease). See Epidemics Outercourse for premature ejaculation, IV:2700 Oxamniquine for intestinal schistosomiasis, IV:2955 for parasitic disease, I:273 Oxaprozin, IV:2361 Oxiconazole for fungal infections, I:270 Oxidants G6PD from, III:1463 Oxistat. See Oxiconazole; Topical antifungal drugs Oxtriphylline with anticonvulsants, I:255 with beta blockers, I:477 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 Oxybutynin chloride for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Oxycodone abuse of, IV:3207 with hydroxyzine, I:285 for pain, I:175 for pain management, IV:2463 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 withdrawal from, V:3573 Oxycodone-acetaminophen for pain, I:175 Oxycontin. See Oxycodone Oxygen 2,3-DPG in, V:3420 in anemia, II:915 in angina pectoris, I:229 in atelectasis, I:389, 390 blood gas analysis for, I:527 with coronary heart disease, II:929 decrease in, with aging, I:69 decreased diabetes insipidus from, II:1046 with ECMO, II:1256 with embolism, I:355 for erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 in fainting, II:1279 in fight or flight response, II:677 in heart attacks, III:1533 in interstitial lung diseases, III:1773 lack of, V:3499 from chest physical therapy, II:747 during childbirth, II:759, 1162 cyanosis from, II:979 from heart failure, III:1537, 1538 hemoglobin test for, III:1576 from necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 from ventricular septal defect, V:3500 in Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3574 levels of 3854 in acrocyanosis, I:31 lactic acid test for, III:1944 with nasal packing, IV:2314 in near drowning, IV:2327 from pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 in polycythemia vera, IV:2658 in respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 in secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 in transposition of the great arteries, V:3373 with meningococcemia, III:2157 with myoglobin, III:2292 in nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 with pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 warmed for hypothermia, III:1755 Oxygen chamber therapy. See Hyperbaric oxygenation Oxygen deprivation cesarean section and, II:724 from placental abruption, IV:2613 in shock, IV:3033 See also Anoxia Oxygen tension measurements for amputation, I:158–159 Oxygen therapy, III:1837–1841, IV:2450–2452 for altitude sickness, I:133–134 for anoxia, I:217, 427 for ARDS, I:68 for asbestosis, I:370 for asthma, I:383 blood gas analysis for, I:527 for cluster headache, II:825 for CO poisoning, II:652 for COPD, II:811 for cor pulmonale, II:917 for croup, II:960 for decompression sickness, II:1010 for dengue fever, II:1028 for dyspnea, IV:3037 for emphysema, II:1173, 1175 for empyema, II:1176 for frostbite, II:1372 for headache, III:1524 after heart transplantation, III:1547 hyperbaric (See Hyperbaric oxygenation) for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 with laser surgery, III:1961 in life support, III:2000 for lung abscess, III:2039 for lung diseases, III:2051 for nitrite toxicity, III:2195 for pancreatitis, IV:2480 for placental abruption, IV:2613 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for postpolio syndrome, IV:2684 for prematurity, IV:2706 for pulmonary edema, IV:2778–2779 for pulmonary embolism, II:1171, IV:2781 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785 for respiratory acidosis, IV:2861 for respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 for septic shock, IV:3005 for shock, IV:3034, 3035 for silicosis, IV:3055 for sleep apnea, IV:3085 for smoke inhalation, IV:3102 Oxygen toxicity from hyperbaric oxygen therapy, III:1395 from inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 Oxymetazoline for congestion, II:1012 Oxymetholone with estrogens, III:1670 Oxytocin for childbirth, II:1108–1109 with contraction stress test, I:222 to induce labor, IV:2705 for induced labor, III:1816 in lactation, III:1943 for stillbirth, IV:3163 Oxytocin challenge test. See Contraction stress test Oxyuriasis. See Enterobiasis Ozone lung diseases from, III:2050 in sun exposure, IV:3220 Ozone therapy, IV:2450–2451, 2450–2452 P p24 antigen assays for AIDS, I:80, 86 p53 gene colon cancer from, II:850 PABA. See Para-amino benzoic acid PAC. See Atrial ectopic beats PACAB. See Port-access coronary artery bypass Pacemaker, IV:2453–2455, 2454 for arrhythmias, I:353 for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:408 for bundle branch block, I:614 in catheter ablation, II:680 for Chagas’ disease, II:728 with defibrillation, II:1015 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from guinea worm infection, III:1494 heat treatment for, III:1558–1560 from herniated disk, III:1627 from impacted tooth, III:1799, 1800 from infectious arthritis, III:1819 from IUDs, III:1877 from kidney stones, III:1917–1918 from laser surgery, III:1962 laser surgery for, III:1960 local anesthesia for, I:190 from malocclusion, III:2106 measurement of, IV:2460 from migraine, III:2187–2188 from multiple sclerosis, III:2250, 2251, 2253 from muscle spasms and cramps of, III:2260 from muscular dystrophy, III:2262–2267 from neuralgia, IV:2338–2340 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 opioid analgesics for, I:175 osteopathy for, IV:2422 after radial keratotomy, IV:2805 from reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2839–2840 response in death, II:1005 rofecoxib for, IV:2901 rolfing for, IV:2912 with sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 from scoliosis, IV:2970 with sexual intercourse (See Painful intercourse) from sports injuries, IV:3145, 3146 from surgery, III:1427 in TMJ, V:3249 with torticollis, V:3340 from wounds, V:3581 See also Analgesics; Bone pain Pain disorder. See Somatoform disorders Pain management, IV:2459–2461, IV:2461–2465 acupuncture for, I:39–40 for AIDS, I:81 with analgesics, I:173–175 art therapy for, I:367 for coccyx injuries, II:837 cognitive therapy for, II:840 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 electric brain stimulation for, II:1146 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1144 for endometriosis, II:1194 feldenkrais method for, II:1304 with Gaucher’s disease, III:2005 for gout, III:1477 guided imagery for, III:1491 immobilization and, III:1780 for low back pain, III:2033 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with muscle relaxants, III:2258 palliative cancer therapy for, II:641–642 with polymyositis, IV:2667 for porphyria, IV:2674 after portal vein bypass, IV:2676 reflexology for, IV:2841 reiki for, IV:2848 for sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 for shingles, IV:3032 for sickle cell disease, IV:3046 therapeutic touch for, V:3281, 3283 See also Analgesics Pain medication. See Analgesics Pain relief. See Pain management Pain scales. See Pain, measurement of Painful intercourse, II:1308, IV:3015–3017 Painful menustruation. See Dysmenorrhea Painful urination. See Dysuria Painkillers. See Analgesics Paint lead poisoning from, III:1965 occupational asthma from, IV:2386 Palatal push-back. See Push-back technique Palatal stiffening for snoring, IV:3112 Palatal-uvula neurologic examination of, IV:2352 Palliative cancer therapy, II:635, II:641–642 Palliative care for esophageal cancer, II:1241 for gallbladder cancer, III:1380 laparoscopy for, III:1948 for liver cancer, III:2020 for metastatic small cell lung cancer, III:2049 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2280 for poliovirus, IV:2650 reiki for, IV:2848 Pallidotomy for tremor, V:3383 Palmar-planter erythrodysesthesia syndrome. See Hand-Schuller-Christian disease Palmoplantaris pustulosis, IV:2756 Palpation breast (See Breast palpation) for costochondritis, II:940 for intussusception, III:1855, 1856 for jaundice, III:1883 for lymphadenitis, III:2064 during physical examination, IV:2592 for pleurisy, IV:2631 for pyelonephritis, IV:2789 during rectal examination, IV:2833 spleen (See Spleen palpation) for varicose veins, V:3476 3855 Palpation with electrical nerve stimulation, II:1145 for heart block, III:1537 for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 in life support, III:2000 with MRI, III:2082 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 with myelography, III:2285 for myocarditis, III:2290 for prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2725 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 for sick sinus syndrome, IV:3040 Pacemaker syndrome, IV:2454 Packed cell volume. See Hematocrit Packed red cell volume. See Hematocrit Paclitaxel for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 Paddock-pipes. See Horsetail Paget, James, IV:2455 Paget’s disease of bone, IV:2455–2457, 2456 acid phosphatase test for, I:23 alkaline phosphatase and, I:106 bone disorder agents for, I:542 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 fractures from, II:1363 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 skull x-rays for, IV:3083 spinal stenosis from, IV:3136 Paget’s disease of the breast, IV:2457–2458 Paget’s disease of the vulva. See Vulvar cancer Pagophagia, IV:2595–2596 Pain, IV:2459–2461 abdominal (See Abdominal pain) acetaminophen for, I:18–19 after amputation, I:159 aspirin for, I:377–378 back (See Back pain) with barbiturates, I:446 breast, with fibrocystic condition, II:1323 from burns, I:618 with cancer, II:641–642 chest (See Chest pain) chronic (See Chronic pain) with coccyx injuries, II:836–837 from decompression sickness, II:1009 electromyography for, II:1159 after episiotomy, II:1222 evoked potential studies for, II:1160 after eye muscle surgery, II:1269 fainting from, II:1280 with female genital mutilation, II:1307 from flesh-eating disease, II:1336, 1337 from fluoroquinolones, II:1346 from frostbite, II:1371 Palpebral conjuctiva Palpebral conjunctiva. See Conjunctiva Palpitations, IV:2465–2466 ambulatory electrocardiography for, III:1654 caffeine with, II:626 from catecholamines, II:677 from heart biopsy, III:2287 from heart valve diseases, III:1550 from hyperthyroidism, III:1724 from menopause, III:2159 from sick sinus syndrome, IV:3040 from ventricular tachycardia, V:3504 Palsy. See Paralysis Pamelor. See Nortriptyline Pamidronate for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for Paget’s disease, IV:2456 Panadol. See Acetaminophen Panax ginseng. See Ginseng Pancarditis, IV:2897 Panchakarma, I:431 Pancreas aspartate aminotransferase in, I:374 in diabetes mellitus, II:1047–1048 with duodenal obstruction, II:1110 with endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1198 function of, IV:2471, 2473 in gestational diabetes, III:1447 injuries of pancreatectomy for, IV:2469 punctured from kidney biopsy, III:1908 Pancreas transplantation, II:1052, IV:2466–2468, 2467, 2468t Pancreatectomy, IV:2468–2471, IV:2472, 2476 Pancreatic abscess, IV:2479 Pancreatic ascites. See Ascites Pancreatic biopsy with ERCP, IV:2480 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472, 2475 Pancreatic cancer, II:631, 632 amylase tests for, I:160 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 endocrine, IV:2471–2473 exocrine, IV:2473–2477 with familial polyposis, II:1287 laparoscopy for, III:1948 lipase test for, III:2002 liver cancer from, III:2019 pancreatectomy for, IV:2469–2470 PTHC for, IV:2533 urinalysis for, V:3446 See also Cancer Pancreatic diseases from cryptosporidiosis, II:967 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 indigestion from, III:1813 lipase test for, III:2002 3856 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 in polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 ultrasonography for, I:2 Pancreatic duct obstruction of, II:1196–1197 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 stool fat test for, IV:3173–3174 Pancreatic enzymes in jaundice, III:1881 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2477 See also Digestive enzymes Pancreatic insufficiency, I:160 Pancreatic necrosis, IV:2479 Pancreatic pseudocyst, IV:2479 Pancreatic tumors endoscopic sphincterotomy for, II:1198 hypotonic duodenography for, III:1759, 1760 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 Pancreaticoduodenectomy, IV:2469–2470 Pancreatin for autoimmune diseases, I:424 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 Pancreatitis, IV:2477–2481 from alcoholism, I:96 amylase tests for, I:160 from antiretroviral drugs, I:304 ARDS from, I:68 ascites and, I:372 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 CA-19-9 antigen in, V:3413 from campylobacteriosis, II:631 carcinoembryonic antigen levels in, II:654 with cholesterol tests, II:794 with diuretics, II:1089 E. coli infections from, II:1235 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 from endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1199 from ERCP, II:1197 vs. gallbladder cancer, III:1379 gallstones from, III:1388 from hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1707 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1714 hypotonic duodenography for, III:1759 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 lipase test for, III:2002 from lithotripsy, III:2016 liver function tests for, III:2026–2027 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 pancreatectomy for, IV:2469, 2471 pancreatic cancer and, IV:2474 peritonitis from, IV:2556, 2557 pleurisy from, IV:2631 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 vitamin E deficiency from, V:3518 Pancreatoblastoma, IV:2474 Pancytopenia, III:1502 Pandemics. See Epidemics Pandol. See Acetaminophen Panel reactive antibodies test for heart transplantation, III:1546 for kidney transplantation, III:1921 Panhypopituitarism, III:1747, 1748 Panic attacks. See Panic disorder Panic disorder, I:322, 323, IV:2482–2484 with agoraphobia, I:72–73, IV:2583 antimalarials and, I:286 benzodiazepines for, I:466 with binge eating disorder, I:481 binge eating disorder and, I:481 caffeine with, II:626 calcium channel blockers for, II:627 central nervous system depressants for, II:688 cognitive therapy for, II:840 with dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 in gays and lesbians, III:1416 vs. generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 insomnia from, III:1843 MAO inhibitors for, III:2213 in men, III:2168 from MRI, III:2084 palpitations from, IV:2465 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 with somatoform disorders, IV:3115 SSRIs for, IV:2990 tricyclic antidepressants for, I:258 Panniculitis, vs. erythema nodosum, II:1227 Panretinal photocoagulation. See Photocoagulation Pantetheine with Atkins diet, I:402 Pantothenic acid, V:3524 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 Panuveitis, V:3460 PAP. See Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis Pap smear, IV:2484–2488, 2485f, 2486 for cervical cancer, II:634, 712, 716 with cervical conization, II:717 for cervicitis, II:723 colposcopy after, II:864 for cystitis, II:993 for DES exposure, II:1040 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Paraffin, for heat treatment, III:1559 Paraflex. See Chlorzoxazone Parafon Forte DSC. See Chlorzoxazone Paragonimiasis, II:1343 hemoptysis from, III:1589 from lung flukes, II:1343 Paragonimus skrjabini, II:1343 Paragonimus westermani, II:1343 Parainfluenza viruses croup from, II:960 laryngitis from, III:1957 Paralysis, IV:2490–2493, IV:2550 from arbovirus encephalitis, I:347 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 botulinum for, V:3382 with botulinum toxin injections, I:559 from botulism, I:559, 560, II:1354–1355, 1356 from CNS infections, II:690 from congenital brain defects, II:891 from conversion disorder, IV:3114 with creatinine test, II:950 from decompression sickness, II:1010 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 after disk removal, II:1082 from electric brain stimulation, II:1146 from encephalitis, II:1179 from endarterectomy, II:1182 eye, from Wernicke’s syndrome, III:1930 facial (See Facial paralysis) from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 with fractures, II:1363 from Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 heartburn from, III:1553 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 from hyperkalemia, III:1705 from hypernatremia, III:1710, 2194 hypokalemia from, III:1740 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1879–1880 from Krabbe’s disease, III:2004 in life support, III:2000 from mushroom poisoning, III:2268 with narcolepsy, IV:3087 from overhydration, IV:2449 from poliomyelitis, IV:2683–2684 from poliovirus, IV:2648, 2649 from progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 with PSP, IV:2721 rectal prolapse from, IV:2835 from regional anesthesia, I:192 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 from shellfish poisoning, II:1335 from shingles, IV:3032 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3128–3129 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 from stroke, IV:3194 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3203 from Tay-Sachs disease, III:2004 from TIA, V:3371 transverse myelitis from, V:3376 urinary catheterization for, V:3450 velopharyngeal insufficiency from, V:3490 from X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, IV:2560 Paralytic shellfish poisoning. See Shellfish, poisoning from Paramyotonia congenita, III:2261, 2294 Paramyxovirus measles from, III:2139 Paranoia, IV:2493–2494 antimalarials and, I:286 with delusions, II:1022 from dementia, II:1025 Paranoid personality disorder, IV:2493, 2563, 2564–2567 Paranoid schizophrenia, IV:2493, 2958 Parapharyngeal abscess. See Throat abscess Paraphilias, IV:3017–3020 Paraproteinemic peripheral neuropathy, IV:2620 Paraquat, III:1842 Parasites cholangitis from, II:774 diarrhea from, I:264 in fluke infections, II:1342 gas from, I:271 gastroenteritis from, III:1409 indigestion from, III:1813 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 prostatitis from, IV:2740 stool O & P test for, IV:3174–3175 tape worm infections, V:3238–3242 urinalysis for, V:3447 Parasitic diseases antihelminthic drugs for, I:273–275 antimalarials for, I:286 antiprotozoal drugs for, I:298–299 balantidiasis, I:440–442 cholecystitis from, II:779 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 cutaneous larva migrans, II:974–975 diarrhea from, II:1066 echinococcosis (See Echinococcosis) vs. enterobacterial infections, II:1205–1206 from geophagia, IV:2596 guinea worm infection (See Guinea worm infection) hemoptysis from, III:1589 hospital acquired, III:1674–1675 3857 Parasitic diseases for hormone contraceptives, II:1031–1032 before HRT, III:1673 for IUDs, III:1876 for oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 with pelvic exam, IV:2517–2518 during physical examination, IV:2594 for postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2680 prenatal, IV:2697 Pap test. See Pap smear Papain anaphylaxis from, I:179 for autoimmune diseases, I:424 Papanicolaou, George N., IV:2485 Papanicolaou smear. See Pap smear Papaverine for erectile disorders, IV:3017 for impotence, III:1806 Papaya. See Chymopapain Papillary carcinoma, IV:2474 Papilledema, IV:2488–2489 Papilloma virus. See Papillomavirus Papillomas, nasal. See Nasal papillomas Papillomatosis, laryngeal, III:1792 Papillomavirus, IV:3020 with AIDS, I:78 with anal cancer, I:170, 171 with anal warts, I:172 cancer from, II:632 cervical cancer from, II:715–716 colposcopy for, II:864 condom use and, II:882 gay and lesbian health and, III:1415, 1416 genital warts from, III:1444, IV:2817 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897–1898 pap smear and, IV:2484, 2486 perinatal, IV:2541–2543 vulvar cancer and, V:3536 warts and, V:3547 Papnet, IV:2486 Papoose root. See Blue cohosh Papules, IV:2917, 3074 Para-amino benzoic acid photosensitivity from, IV:2589 for sunburn prevention, I:620 Paracelsus, Phillippus Aureolis, II:686–687, 1293 Paracentesis, IV:2489–2490 for ascites, I:372 of the tympanic membrane (See Middle ear ventilation) Paracetamol. See Acetaminophen Paracoccidioidal granuloma. See South American blastomycosis Paracoccidioides brasiliensis, IV:3121 Paracoccidioidomycosis. See South American blastomycosis Parasitic diseases lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 myocarditis from, III:2289 pericarditis from, IV:2538 from protozoa, II:967 small intestine biopsy for, IV:3095 stool O & P test for, IV:3174–3175 tetracyclines for, I:241 vs. travelers diarrhea, V:3379 travelers diarrhea from, V:3379 urinalysis for, V:3445 vulvovaginitis from, V:3539 WBC count and differential for, V:3557 Parasomnias, IV:2668, 3088 Parastomal hernia with colostomy, II:864 from urinary diversion, V:3453 Parasympathetic nerves in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 Parasympathetic nervous system cholinergic agents for, II:794–795 Parasympathomimetics for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 Parathion, III:1842 Parathyroid diseases hyperphosphatemia from, II:1158 neonatal magnesium deficiency from, III:2079 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 parathyroid scan for, IV:2496–2497 in polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 Parathyroid glands in DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1071, 1072 enlarged (See Parathyroid hyperplasia) in hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 surgery of, IV:2497–2498 in thyroidectomy, V:3317 x-ray imaging of, IV:2496–2497 Parathyroid hormone test, IV:2494–2495 Parathyroid hormones with calcium, III:1696 function of, IV:2496 with hypercalcemia, III:1697 in hypocalcemia, III:1731 in hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 Parathyroid hyperplasia, III:1713 Parathyroid scan, IV:2496–2497, 2496 Parathyroid scintigraphy. See Parathyroid scan Parathyroid surgery hypoparathyroidism from, III:1744 Parathyroid tumors hypercalcemia from, III:1697 hyperparathyroidism from, III:1713 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 3858 parathyroid hormone test for, IV:2494 Parathyroidectomy, IV:2497–2498, 2498f Paratyphoid fever, IV:2498–2500 Paregoric for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 Parenchymatous keratitis. See Keratitis Parent-child relations conduct disorder from, II:883 Parent education for child abuse, II:756 on FTT, II:1279 Parental behavior hypochondriasis from, III:1732–1733 Parenteral nutrition, IV:2370 for acidosis, III:2179 vs. enteral nutrition, V:3402 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 for malnutrition, III:2105 with metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 mineral supplements and, III:2196 for necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 for protein-energy malnutrition, IV:2744 for urinary diversion, V:3452 See also Enteral nutrition Parents in child abuse, II:753 self help groups for, III:1485 training of for child abuse, II:756 Parents Anonymous, II:756 Paresis vs. paralysis, IV:2490 Paresthesias from Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1492 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1496 Parietal cell vagotomy. See Proximal gastric vagotomy Parietal pleura, IV:2628–2629 Parinaud’s oculoglandular syndrome. See Conjunctivitis Parkinson, James, IV:2500 Parkinson disease, IV:2500–2503, 2501 vs. African trypanosomiasis, IV:3093 amantidine for, I:317 with aminoglycosides, I:150 with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:164 bronchodilators with, I:602 calcium channel blockers with, II:628 cell therapy for, II:686 cholinergic antagonists for, I:308 color blindness from, II:860 constipation from, II:906 Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease and, II:953 with decongestants, II:1012 dementia from, II:1025 drugs for, I:295–298 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 electric brain stimulation for, II:1146 electroencephalography for, II:1151 electromyography for, II:1255 impotence from, III:1805 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 Mensendiek systemfor, III:2226 movement disorders from, III:2220–2221, 2223, 2224 neurogenic bladder in, IV:2347 neurologic examination for, IV:2352 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 PET scan for, IV:2677 vs. PSP, IV:2721 sexual dysfunctions from, IV:3016 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 sphincter electromyography for, II:1255 symptomatic (See Symptomatic Parkinson disease) tremor from, V:3381 urinary incontinence from, V:3453 Parkinsonism. See Symptomatic Parkinson disease Parlodel. See Bromocriptine Parnate. See Tranylcypromine Paromomycin, I:150 for amebiasis, I:145 for balantidiasis, I:441 for cryptosporidiosis, II:967 for giardiasis, III:1451 for parasitic infection, I:150 Paronychia nail removal for, IV:2309 Parosteal osteogenic sarcomas, IV:2942 Parotid cancer parotidectomy for, IV:2504–2505 Parotid gland scan. See Salivary gland scan Parotid glands. See Salivary glands Parotidectomy, IV: 2504–2505, 2504 Parotitis in mumps, III:2255 Paroxetine, I:256, IV:2990 with antimigraine agents, I:291 for bipolar disorder, I:487 drug interactions with, II:1102 for mood disorders, III:2217 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for phobias, I:73, IV:2583 for PMS, IV:2710–2711 for premature ejaculation, IV:2700 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Patch tests, II:1019 for allergies, I:117 for asthma, I:381 for contact dermititis, II:909 for dermatitis, II:1038 for skin lesions, IV:3076 Patella. See Kneecap Patellar arthritis. See Chondromalacia patellae Patellectomy. See Kneecap removal Patello-femoral pain syndrome. See Chondromalacia patellae Patent ductus arteriosus, II:899–901, IV:2512–2515, 2513 inhalation therapies for, III:1838 from prematurity, IV:2707 surgery for, III:1544 Paternity testing blood typing for, I:531 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 Pathogens cancer-causing, II:633, 635t causing food poisoning, II:1355t Pathologic myopia. See Myopia Pathological gambling. See Compulsive gambling disorder Pathological myopia. See Myopia Patient compliance drug therapy monitoring for, II:1107 in gastritis treatment, III:1407 Patient education for bipolar disorder, I:488 for enterostomies, II:1211 for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 for gastrostomy, III:1411 for hypopituitarism, III:1748 for mania, III:2113 for mastectomy, III:2130 for osteoarthritis, IV:2413 in plastic surgery, IV:2621–2622 for STDs, III:1417 Patient isolation, III:1872–1874 with catatonic excitement, II:676 for chlamydial pneumonia, II:771 with diphtheria, II:1078 with hemophilus infections, III:1587 for infection control, III:1823 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2330 with plague, IV:2616 for tuberculosis, V:3409 Pau d’arco for blastomycosis, I:513 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 Pauciarticular juvenile arthritis. See Juvenile arthritis Pauciarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. See Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis Paucibacillary leprosy. See Tuberculoid leprosy Pavlik harness GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 Pavor nocturnus. See Night terrors Paxil. See Paroxetine Pay-loo-ah, lead poisoning from, III:1965 PB. See Tuberculoid leprosy PBD. See Peroxisome biogenesis disorders PBST. See Peripheral blood stem cell transplantation PC-SPES for prostate cancer, IV:2734 PCD. See Primary ciliary dyskinesia PCOS. See Polycystic ovary syndrome PCP. See Phencyclidine; Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia PCR test. See Polymerase chain reaction test PCS. See Postconcussion syndrome PCT. See Porphyria cutanea tarda PD. See Parkinson disease PDA. See Patent ductus arteriosus PDD. See Pervasive developmental disorders PDT. See Photodynamic therapy Peabody Individual Achievement TestRevised, III:1969 Peach seed poisoning, IV:2643 Peak flowmeter, I:383, IV:2784 Peas, V:3513 Pectus carinatum in Marfan syndrome, III:2115 Pectus excavatum in Marfan syndrome, III:2115 Pedialyte. See Oral rehydration solutions Pediazole. See Erythromycin Pedicle flap. See Surgical flaps Pediculicides for skin lesions, IV:3076 Pediculosis. See Lice infestations Pediculosis humanus capitis, III:1994 Pediculosis humanus corporis, III:1995 relapsing fever from, IV:2852 trench fever from, I:434 Pedigree analysis, III:1430 Pedophilia, IV:3018 Pedunculated fibroids, III:2292, V:3459 PEEP. See Positive-end expiratory pressure Peer groups, I:212, II:883 PEG-ADA, IV:3010 Pegademase bovine. See PEG-ADA Pegylated interferon, for hepatitis C, III:1604 Pelargonium odoratissimum. See Geranium Pellagra, IV:2515–2516 vs. Hartnup disease, III:1511 from niacin deficiency, IV:3161, V:3525 3859 Pellagra Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, IV:2505–2506 Paroxysmal dyspnea, IV:3036 Paroxysmal hemoglobinuria, I:337 Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, II:874 Paroxysmal polyserositis. See Familial Mediterranean fever Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia. See Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia Parrot fever, IV:2506–2507 vs. paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 sputum culture for, IV:3149 Parry’s disease. See Hyperthyroidism Pars planitis, uveitis from, V:3461 Parsley for anemia, I:184 for bladder stones, I:511 Partial birth abortion, I:6–8 Partial cystectomy. See Cystectomy Partial dentures, V:3335 Partial laryngectomy. See Laryngectomy Partial mastectomy. See Lumpectomy Partial molar pregnancy. See Hydatidiform mole Partial nephrectomy. See Nephrectomy Partial seizures, IV:2985 Partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507–2509 Particle radiation in radiation therapy, IV:2812 Parturition. See Childbirth Parvovirus aplastic anemia from, I:337 Passerina. See Chickweed Passiflora incarnata. See Passionflower Passion vine. See Passionflower Passionflower for insomnia, III:1845, IV:3092 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for sleep disorders, IV:3092 for tension headache, V:3255 Passive immunization for myasthenic crisis, III:2274 for polymyositis, IV:2667 Passive motion machines. See Continuous passive motion machines Passive range of motion exercises. See Range of motion exercises Passive smoking. See Secondhand smoke Pasteur, Louis, I:223 Pasteurella multocida, I:206 Pasteurellosis, I:206 Pastia’s lines from scarlet fever, IV:2952 Patanjali, V:3595 Patau, Klaus, IV:2509 Patau’s syndrome, IV:2509–2512, IV:2661 Pellagra periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 Pelvic abscess, I:167 Pelvic adhesions, III:1828 Pelvic cavity in empyema, II:1175, 1176 Pelvic empyema, II:1176 Pelvic examination, IV:2516–2519, 2517f, 2518, 2594 for Bartholin’s gland cyst, I:450 with bladder training, I:512 for cancer, II:634 for cervicitis, II:723 in childbirth, II:757 for cystitis, II:993 for DES exposure, II:1040 digital rectal examination with, IV:2833 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 for dysmenorrhea, II:1117 for ectopic pregnancy, II:1132 with endometrial biopsy, II:1186 for endometriosis, II:1193 for hormone contraceptives, II:1031–1032 with hormone replacement therapy, III:2161 HSG, III:1765 for menstrual disorders, III:2170 for miscarriage, III:2205 for oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 for ovarian cancer, IV:2441 for ovarian cysts, IV:2446 for PCOS, IV:2655 for pelvic relaxation, IV:2524 with placenta previa, IV:2611 for postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2680 in pregnancy, I:219, 220 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for recurrent miscarriage, IV:2837 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Pelvic exercises for bladder training, I:511 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Pelvic fractures, IV:2519–2521 Pelvic infections. See Pelvic inflammatory disease Pelvic inflammatory disease, IV:2521–2524, 2522 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from Chlamydia trachomatis, II:771, IV:3020, 3023 from chlamydial pneumoniae, IV:2540 dysmenorrhea from, III:2170 ectopic pregnancy from, II:1131 erythromycins for, II:1232 from gonorrhea, III:1472, 1473–1474 hysterectomy for, III:1760, 1761–1762 3860 hysterosonography with, III:1768 indigestion from, III:1813, 1815 infertility and, III:1825 from IUDs, II:912, III:1877 laparoscopy for, III:1949 menorrhagia from, II:1112, III:2170 with oral contraceptives, IV:2401 peritonitis from, IV:2556, 2557 salpingectomy for, IV:2937 salpingo-oophorectomy for, IV:2938 from vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Pelvic injuries sacroiliac disease from, IV:2931 Pelvic peritonitis, IV:2521 Pelvic relaxation, IV:2524–2525 Pelvic surgery deep vein thrombosis after, II:1013 impotence from, III:1805 Pelvic thrombophlebitis, II:727 Pelvic traction, V:3357 Pelvic tumors acute kidney failure from, I:44 with impedance phlebography, III:1800 Pelvic ultrasonography, IV:2525–2527, 2526, IV:2691 Pelvic vertebrae. See Spine Pelvis blood clots in, II:1013 muscles episiotomy and, II:1222 in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 pulmonary embolism in, IV:2780 PEM. See Protein-energy malnutrition Pemoline for ADHD, I:412 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 Pemphigus vulgaris, I:422, 423 Pen Ts’ao, I:348 Pen Vee. See Penicillins Pen-Vee K. See Penicillin V Penciclovir, for genital herpes, III:1442 Penectomy, IV:2530 Penetrating head injuries, III:1520 Penetrating wounds, V:3581 from animal bites, I:206, 498–499 to fingertip, II:1333 nocardiosis from, IV:2358 pneumothorax from, IV:2641 splenic trauma from, IV:3141 ultrasonography for, I:1 Penetrex. See Enoxacin Penicillamine for cystinuria, II:991 for heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for lead poisoning, III:1967 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, 306, IV:2901 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 for Wilson’s disease with Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1291 D-Penicillamine for scleroderma, IV:2967 for Wilson disease, V:3567 Penicillin G with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 for clenched fist injury, II:821 for lung abscess, III:2039 for lymphadenitis, III:2065 for meningococcemia, III:2158 for rheumatic fever, IV:2898 for sore throats, IV:3119 Penicillin V, IV:2527 for lung abscess, III:2039 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 for rat-bite fever, IV:2822 Penicillinase-resistant penicillins, I:240 Penicillins, I:240–241, IV:2527–2529 for actinomycosis, I:35 for acute lymphangitis, I:47 allergic purpura from, I:110 anaphylaxis from, I:179 for animal bite infections, I:207 for anthrax, I:225 for antibiotic prophylaxis, IV:2726 autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 for bartonellosis, I:452 with Bence Jones protein test, I:464 for cellulitis, II:685 with cephalosporins, II:693 cholestasis from, II:784 for clenched fist injury, II:821 for cross infection, III:1675 for cystitis, II:993 for diphtheria, II:1078 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for empyema, II:1177 for erysipelas, II:1226 erythema multiforme from, II:1226 erythema nodosum from, II:1227 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for frostbite, II:1372 hives from, III:1642 for leptospirosis, III:1982 for meningitis, III:2156 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 for mycetoma, III:2275 neutropenia from, IV:2354 for otitis media, IV:2435 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for relapsing fever, IV:2853 for scarlet fever, IV:2952 serum sickness from, IV:3008 for sickle cell disease, IV:3046 for sore throats, IV:3119 for splenectomy, IV:3140 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3158 for strep throat, IV:3178–3179, 3223 for streptococcal infections, IV:3184 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with alemtuzumab, I:102 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 Pentothal. See Thiopental Pentoxifylline with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 with cephalosporins, II:694 with gout drugs, III:1480 Peony, for indigestion, III:1814 PEP. See Postexposure prophylaxis Pep-Back. See Caffeine Pepcid. See Famotidine Pepper for atherosclerosis, I:396 for coronary heart disease, II:932 Peppermint for alcoholism, I:98 in aromatherapy, I:349 for cold sores, II:846 for colic, II:848 for contact dermititis, II:910 for indigestion, III:1814 for measles, III:2140 for rubella, IV:2927 for shingles, IV:3032 Peppermint oil Enteric coated for IBS, III:1867 for influenza, III:1835 Peptic ulcer basal gastric secretion test for, III:1400 caffeine with, II:626 drugs for, I:313–314 duodenal obstruction from, II:1110 dyspepsia from, II:1118 gas from, I:271 gastrectomy for, III:1398 gastric acid stimulation test for, III:1400 gastritis and, III:1405–1406 gastrostomy for, III:1410 from Helicobacter pylori, III:1566–1568 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1714 indigestion with, III:1813 lipase test for, III:2002 with low back pain, III:2032 vs. Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 with mastocytosis, III:2132 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 pyloroplasty for, IV:2792 tube compression for, V:3399 types of, V:3431–3432 ulcer surgery for, V:3427 vagotomy for, V:3470 Peptide T, IV:2720 Pepto Bismol. See Bismuth Peptostreptococcus anaerobic infections from, I:167 in clenched fist injury, II:821 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Perception Bender-Gestalt test for, I:464–465 hallucinations from, III:1504 of pain, IV:2460 Perception assesment, IV:2351 Percocet. See Oxycodone-acetaminophen Percussion for atelectasis, I:390 for bronchiectasis, I:597 in chest physical therapy, II:746 for empyema, II:1176 during physical examination, IV:2593 Percutaneous allergy tests, I:123 Percutaneous discectomy. See Disk removal Percutaneous liver biopsy. See Liver biopsy Percutaneous needle aspiration, IV:2479 Percutaneous needle biopsy of the breast, I:575 with pleural biopsy, IV:2627 Percutaneous nephrolithotomy, II:991 Percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage, II:776 Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography, IV:2532–2534 for cholangitis, II:774 for cholestasis, II:785 Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty vs. coronary artery bypass grafting, II:925 for coronary heart disease, II:931 for heart attacks, III:1534 for ischemia, III:1870 MUGA scan for, III:2233 Perennial allergic rhinitis, I:111 Perforated eardrum, IV:2534–2535, 2535f from middle ear ventilation, III:2305 from otitis media, IV:2434 otoscopy for, II:1121 from stapedectomy, IV:3156 surgery for, II:1123 Perforated septum, IV:2535–2536 Perforated stomach ulcer, V:3433 Perforated ulcer, V:3433 Perforated ulcers, I:371, V:3433 Perforating keratoplasty. See Corneal transplantation Performance anxiety, premature ejaculation from, IV:2699 Perfume allergic rhinitis from, I:112 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 Perfusion, for stroke, II:915 3861 Perfusion defects with tetracyclines, V:3268 urinalysis and, V:3445 yaws and, V:3589 Penile cancer, IV:2529–2531 circumcision for, II:812–813 sexual dysfunctions from, IV:3016 Penile erection disorders of (See Erection disorders) impotence and, III:1804–1805 in priapism, IV:2715 pumps and implants for, IV:2531–2532 sildenafil citrate for, IV:3051–3055 after vasectomy, V:3482 Penile prostheses, IV:, 2531–2532, 2531f for impotence, III:1806 for Peyronie’s disease, IV:2572 Penis abnormalities of Peyronie’s disease, IV:2572 in chancroid, II:729 circumcision of (See Circumcision) deformities of circumcision with, II:813 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 in elephantiasis, II:1167 with genital herpes, III:1441 in hermaphroditism, III:1846–1847 in hypogonadism, III:1738 inflammation of (See Balanitis) injuries from body piercing, IV:2599 from cystoscopy, II:997 Peyronie’s disease from, IV:2572 injury to erection disorders from, IV:3051 Penis cancer. See Penile cancer Pennyroyal, for lice, III:1995–1996 Pentagastrin, III:1400 Pentam. See Pentamidine Pentamidine for AIDS, I:80 for leishmaniasis, III:1976 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for pneumonia prevention, IV:2640 for protozoan infections, I:298 Pentamidine isoethionate, IV:2636, 2637 Pentamox. See Amoxicillin Pentazocine, for pain, I:174 Pentids. See Penicillin G Pentobarbital for anxiety, I:320 barbiturate-induced coma from, I:443 for central nervous system depression, II:689 for insomnia, I:282 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 withdrawal from, V:3572 Pentoses, urinalysis for, V:3446 Pentostatin Perfusion lung scan Perfusion defects, V:3278 Perfusion lung scan. See Lung perfusion scan Pergolide for Parkinson disease, I:296, 297 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 Pergonal. See Menotropins Periactin. See Cyproheptadine Perianal ulcers. See Anal fissure Pericardial effusion in cardiac tamponade, IV:2538 pericardiocentesis for, IV:2536–2537 Pericardial sac. See Pericardium Pericardial tamponade. See Cardiac tamponade Pericardiectomy, IV:2540 Pericardiocentesis, II:661, IV:2536–2538, 2538f, 2540 Pericarditis, IV:2538–2540 acute, IV:2538 with aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 atrial fibrillation from, I:407 from enteroviruses, II:1212 from implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, III:1803 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 with Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 from myocarditis, III:2290 pericardial effusion from, IV:2536 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 from salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 Pericardium in atrial septal defect surgery, I:410 in cardiac tamponade, II:660 inflammation of from echinococcosis, II:1128 Pericoronitis, III:1799, IV:2546, 2548 Perimenopause. See Menopause Perimetry test, II:1263–1264, III:1459 Perinatal asphyxia cerebral palsy from, II:703 electronic fetal monitoring for, II:1161 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 from induced labor, III:1816 Perinatal infection, IV:2540–2543 Perinatology, in high risk pregnancy, III:1633–1634 Perindopril, for hypertension, I:203 Perineal exercises, IV:2348 Perineal massage, II:1222 Perineal prostatectomy, IV:2733, 2737, 2738 Perineal stimulation for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Perineal tears episiotomy and, II:1221 3862 Perineum in benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 in childbirth, II:757–758 lesions from leishmaniasis, III:1975 Periodic acid-Schiff stain, III:1985 Periodic amyloid syndrome. See Familial Mediterranean fever Periodic fever. See Familial Mediterranean fever Periodic limb movement disorder (See Nocturnal myoclonus) polysomnography for, IV:2669 restless leg syndrome with, IV:2997, 3000 with restless legs syndrome, IV:2869 Periodic paralysis, III:2294, IV:2491, IV:2544–2545 Periodontal abscess, I:167, IV:2547, 2548 Periodontal disease, IV:2545–2549, 2546, 2547, 2548f vs. bruxism, I:609 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 with diabetes mellitus, II:1049 endocarditis from, II:1183 from heavy metal poisoning, III:1560 laser surgery for, III:1960 from neutropenia, IV:2354 prevention of, IV:2405–2406 Periodontal surgery, II:1183 Periodontitis, IV:2546–2547 Periorbital cellulitis, IV:2407–2408 Periorbital ecchymosis with nasal trauma, IV:2318 Peripartum cardiomyopathy. See Congestive cardiomyopathy Peripheral blood stem cell transplantation bone marrow transplantation and, I:551–552 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647 for lymphomas, III:2094 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 Peripheral myelin protein 22 in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, II:733 Peripheral nerves damage to (See Peripheral neuropathy) functions of, IV:2550 in movement disorders, III:2221–2224 Peripheral nervous system, IV:2550 in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, II:733 diabetic neuropathies of, II:1057 injuries paralysis from, IV:2491 neurologic examination for, IV:2350 in paresthesia, IV:2365 in spinal cord injuries, IV:3128 Peripheral neuritis. See Peripheral neuropathy Peripheral neuropathy, II:1057, IV:2549–2555 from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 from alcohol, I:93 from beriberi, I:470 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 from chemotherapy, II:742 cystometry for, II:995 electric brain stimulation for, II:1146 electromyography for, II:1160 neurologic examination for, IV:2352 with ocular myopathy, IV:2394 with pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 reflex tests and, IV:2841 in Wernicke’s syndrome, III:1931 See also Diabetic neuropathies Peripheral rheumatoid keratitis. See Keratitis Peripheral ulcerative keratitis. See Keratitis Peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555–2556 from atherosclerosis, I:394 endarterectomy for, II:1180 Peripheral vasodilators for hypertension, I:279 Peripheral vision in visual impairment, V:3509 Perirenal hematomas from lithotripsy, III:2016 Peristalsis, III:1553 in achalasia, I:20 with IBS, III:1866 with ileus, III:1779 with vagotomy, V:3470 Peritoneal carcinomatosis ascites from, I:371 Peritoneal dialysis, II:1060 for acute kidney failure, I:46 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 vs. hemodialysis, II:1059 Peritoneal fluid paracentesis for, IV:2489 Peritoneal infection, I:371 Peritoneal lavage, IV:3141 Peritoneal space fluid in, paracentesis for, IV:2489 Peritoneal tap. See Paracentesis Peritoneum in dialysis, II:1060 in hernia repair, III:1626 Peritonitis, I:341, IV:2556–2557 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from cholecystitis, II:779 with constipation, III:1963 from cystectomy, II:983 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Persistent vegetative state. See Vegetative state Personal care products poisoning from, IV:2644 Personal gain from malingering, III:2100 Personal hygiene. See Hygiene Personality addicitive (See Addictive personality) stress and, IV:3185 Personality changes from anoxia, I:217 Personality development, III:1676 Personality disorders, IV:2562–2567 with binge eating disorder, I:481 binge eating disorder and, I:481 cognitive therapy for, II:840 in conduct disorder, II:883 from dementia, II:1025 in dementia, II:1025 with dissociative disorders, II:1086–1087 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 from encephalitis, II:1179 from endarterectomy, II:1182 factitious disorders from, II:1277 Holtzman inkblot test for, III:1655 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 impulse control disorders as, III:1807–1808 vs. malingering, III:2100–2101 from measles, III:2139 Munchausen syndrome from, III:2257, 2258 paraphilias from, IV:3018 psychosis with, IV:2765 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 self mutilation with, IV:2993, 2994 with somatoform disorders, IV:3116 Tourette syndrome and, V:3343 Personality tests, IV:2763, 2764 Bender-Gestalt for, I:465 MMPI-2, III:2198 Myers-Briggs, III:2285–2286 for personality disorders, IV:2565 for stress, IV:3185 See also Holtzman inkblot test Pertofane. See Desipramine Pertussis. See Whooping cough Pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2567–2570 in children, II:762, 764, 765 not otherwise specified, IV:2568–2569 Pessary, for pelvic relaxation, IV:2524, 2525 Pesticides brain tumors from, I:569 detoxification of, II:1041–1042 kidney damage from, IV:2337 lymphomas from, III:2092 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234 multiple myeloma from, III:2239 neutropenia from, IV:2353, 2354 PET scan. See Positron emission tomography Pet therapy, IV:2570–2572, 2571 Petechiae. See Purpura Petrochemicals in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 Petrolatum with nasal packing, IV:2313 Petroleum for motion sickness, III:2219 Petroleum jelly for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for circumcision, II:814 with condoms, II:882 for corns, II:924 for dermatitis, II:1038 for enterobiasis, II:1208 for lice, III:1995 with minoxidil, III:2202 for nail removal, IV:2310 for shingles, IV:3032 with ultraviolet light treatment, V:3436 Petrosal sinus sampling for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 Petrous apicectomy, II:1124 Petrous apicitis, II:1124 Pets asthma from, I:380, 384 with lyme disease, III:2060 roundworm infections and, IV:2925 Pewterwort. See Horsetail Peyote. See Mescaline Peyronie’s disease, III:2167, IV:2572–2573 impotence from, III:1804–1805 sexual dysfunctions from, IV:3016 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Pfeiffer’s syndrome, IV:2661 Pfizerpen. See Penicillin G PGL. See Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy pH monitoring in acidosis, III:2179 blood gas analysis for, I:527 of esophagus, II:1242, 1243 for hiccups, III:1632 in metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 pH test for CO poisoning, II:652 for respiratory acidosis, IV:2861 for respiratory alkalosis, IV:2862 in semen analysis, IV:2995 urinalysis for, V:3445 Phacoemulsification in cataract surgery, II:671 for cataracts, II:674 3863 Phacoemulsification from diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 from E. coli, II:1235 enterostomy for, II:1209 ileus from, III:1779 from intussusception, III:1856 from Listeria monocytogenes, III:2013 paracentesis for, IV:2489 from PTHC, IV:2533 from ruptured appendix, I:340 from travelers diarrhea, V:3379 from typhoid, V:3421 from ulcerative colitis, V:3430 Peritonsillar abscess. See Throat abscess Perivascular microglia, II:695 Perls, Fritz, III:1676, 2226, IV:2912 Permanone. See Permethrin Permax. See Bromocriptine; Pergolide Permethrin for filariasis prevention, II:1331 for lice, III:1995 for malaria prevention, III:2091 for scabies, IV:2950 Permixon. See Finasteride Pernicious anemia, I:181, 184, 422, 423–424, IV:2557–2559, 2558 complete blood count for, I:521 from diphyllobothrium latum, V:3240 gastric acid stimulation test for, III:1400 hypoparathyroidism from, III:1744 mineral supplements for, III:2196, 2197 red blood cell indices for, IV:2839 reticulocyte count for, IV:2875 stomach cancer from, IV:3165 vitamin B12 for, V:3526 vitamin toxicity and, V:3523 with vitiligo, V:3527 Peroxisomal disorders, IV:2559–2562 Peroxisome biogenesis disorders, IV:2559–2662 Peroxisomes, IV:2559–2560 Perphenazine tardive dyskinesia from, V:3242 Perry’s disease. See Graves’ disease Persantine. See Dipyridamole Persecution in delusions, II:1022 Perseveration with Alzheimer’s disease, I:136 Bender-Gestalt test for, I:465 Persian berries. See Buckthorn Persistant hiccups. See Hiccups Persistent fetal circulation syndrome inhalation therapies for, III:1837 Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy, I:76 Persistent hiccups, III:1631, 1632 Phagocytes Phagocytes in chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 in lung abscess, III:2038 Phalilalia from Tourette syndrome, V:3342, 3343 Phantom limb after amputation, I:159 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 pain in, IV:2459 pain management and, IV:2462 from traumatic amputations, V:3378 Pharmaceuticals. See Drugs Pharmacogenetics, IV:2573–2575 Pharmacopeia, U.S., III:1616 Pharmocognosy, III:1616 Pharyngeal cancer brain tumor from, I:569 vs. vocal cord nodules and polyps, V:3529 See also Nasopharyngeal cancer Pharyngeal diphtheria, II:1077 Pharyngeal flap procedure for velopharyngeal insufficiency, V:3490 Pharyngeal pouches in DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 Pharyngitis. See Sore throat Pharyngoconjunctival fever, I:56 Pharyngoplasty, V:3490 Pharynx in DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1071 endoscopy of, IV:3057 in hiccups, III:1632 with mucormycosis, III:2232 in nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 neurologic examination of, IV:2352 physical examination of, IV:2593 smear of for streptococcal infections, IV:3184 Phazyme. See Simethicone Phenacetin kidney cancer from, III:1909 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Phenazopyridine G6PD and, III:1465 urinalysis and, V:3443 Phencyclidine abuse of, IV:3207, 3209 delirium from, II:1021 delusions from, II:1023 with general anesthetics, I:189 hallucinations from, III:1504 psychosis from, IV:2766 with regional anesthetics, I:191 Phendimetrazine, II:691, IV:2376 Phenelzine, I:256–257 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antihemorrhoid agents, I:275 3864 with antihistamines, I:278 with antimigraine agents, I:291 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 for anxiety, I:321 with beta blockers, I:477 for bipolar disorder, I:488 with bronchodilators, I:602 with bupropion, IV:3111 with decongestants, II:1012 for depression, II:1035, III:2213 with dicyclomine, I:309 for mood disorders, III:2217 with opioid analgesics, I:178 for phobias, IV:2583 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2980 Phenergan. See Promethazine Phenobarbital for anxiety, I:320 for barbiturate withdrawal, V:3573 for cholestasis, II:785 for convulsions, I:253 with fibrinogen test, II:1320 gamma-glutamyl transferase levels from, III:2024 for hiccups, III:1632 with hydroxyzine, I:285 for seizures, IV:2986 Phenol for contracture, IV:3131 in liver encephalopathy, III:2022 for movement disorders, III:2224 Phenothiazines, IV:2674 anosmia from, IV:3099 as antihistamine, I:277 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 with growth hormone tests, III:1487 neutropenia from, IV:2353 prolactin test and, IV:2723 for psychosis, I:300, 301 Phenotype HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 Phenotypic drug resistance tests for AIDS, I:86 Phenoxybenzamine for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1203 Phentermine, II:691 for weight loss, IV:2376 Phenylalanine with cephalosporins, II:693 for cocaine addiction, II:833 from cough suppressants, II:944 in penicillins, IV:2528 phenylketonuria and, IV:2575 Phenylalanine hydroxylase phenylketonuria and, IV:2575–2576 Phenylbutazone, IV:2361 cholestasis from, II:783 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 Phenylbutylpiperadines for psychosis, I:300 Phenylephrine with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 Phenylephrine hydrochloride for hemorrhoids, I:275 Phenylhydrazines G6PD and, III:1465 Phenylketonuria, IV:2575–2577 amino acid screening for, I:148 autism and, II:764 with cephalosporins, II:693 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790 congenital brain defects from, II:891 with congenital heart disease, II:901 with cough suppressants, II:944 mental retardation from, III:2174, 2175, 2176 with penicillins, IV:2528 from recessive inheritance, I:491 seizures from, IV:2986 syndactyly with, IV:2661 urinalysis for, V:3445 Phenylpropanolamine, II:691 with caffeine, II:626 in decongestants, II:1013 for deviated septum, II:1045 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 for weight loss, IV:2376 Phenytoin with acetaminophen, I:19 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with antirheumatic drugs, I:307 with bupropion, IV:3111 for convulsions, I:253 cortisol test with, II:937 diabetes insipidus from, II:1046 for encephalitis, II:1179 with estrogens, III:1670 for Fabry’s disease, III:2005 gamma-glutamyl transferase levels from, III:2024 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788 for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 for neuralgia, IV:2339 neutropenia from, IV:2354 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 for pain, IV:2460 for pain management, IV:2463 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552 pleurisy from, IV:2631 with prochlorperazine, I:294 with red blood cell indices, IV:2837 for seizures, IV:2986 serum sickness from, IV:3008 with SSRIs, I:258, IV:2993 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Phonetic decoding, I:416 Phoropter for eye examination, II:1263 Phosphate salts in bones, I:544 Phosphates acute kidney failure from, I:45 with calcium, III:1696 in chronic kidney failure, II:806 deficiency of, III:2190–2192 in electrolyte disorders, II:1153, 1155, 1156 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 with folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 hypocalcemia from, III:1731 parathyroid hormone test and, IV:2494–2495 poisoning hyperphosphatemia from, II:1158 supplements of, III:2196 toxicity, III:2194, 2195 Phosphatidylcholine for Alzheimer’s disease, I:140 Phosphoenolpyruvate analogues, II:1237 Phosphofructokinase muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 Phosphoglycerate kinase, III:2261 Phospholine iodide. See Echthiophate Phospholipidosis. See Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis Phospholipids in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706 in PAP, IV:2775–2776 Phosphorus in chronic kidney failure, II:807 in hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 imbalance in, IV:2584–2586 kidney function tests for, III:1913 lung diseases from, III:2050 in mineral deficiencies, III:2190 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 Phosphorus-32, III:2195 Phosphorylase b kinase, III:2261 4-Phosphoryloxy-N hallucinations from, III:1504 Photic stimulation in motion sickness, III:2218 Photoallergy, IV:2589 Photochemotherapy for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976, 977 for lichen planus, III:1997 for psoriasis, IV:2757 Photocoagulation for eye cancer, II:1261 for glaucoma, III:1459 for macular degeneration, III:2077 for retinoblastoma, IV:2886 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for retinopathy, IV:2891 Photodermatitis. See Photosensitivity disorders Photodynamic therapy for bladder cancer, I:508 for esophageal cancer, II:1241 with lasers, III:1959 for macular degeneration, III:2077 Photokeratitis. See Snowblindness Photophobia from albinism, I:90 conjunctivitis from, II:903 from uveitis, V:3462 Photoreceptors in macular degeneration, III:2075 Photorefractive keratectomy, III:2299, IV:2586–2589 Photosensitive drugs phototherapy with, IV:2590 for vitiligo, IV:3078 Photosensitive lenses for eyeglasses, II:1266 Photosensitivity disorders, IV:2589–2590, 2589 from albinism, I:90, 91 with antibiotics, I:242 from chlorpromazine, I:300 with contact lenses, II:1268 from fluoroquinolones, II:1345 from Hartnup disease, III:1511 from laser surgery, III:1962 from leptospirosis, III:1982 from malnutrition, III:2104 from migraines, III:2188 from nalidixic acid, V:3448 from nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, IV:2414 NSAIDs and, IV:2362 phototherapy with, IV:2590 St. John’s wort and, IV:3152–3153 ultrasonography for, II:1258 Phototherapy, IV:2590–2591, 2590 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976 for elevated bilirubin, III:1465 for jet lag, III:1886 for mood disorders, III:2217 for neonatal jaundice, III:1883, IV:2331 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979, 2980 Phototoxicity, IV:2589 essential oils and, I:351, 352 physical allergy as, IV:2592 Phrenic nerve in hiccups, III:1631 injuries to, III:2145 with liver biopsy, III:2018 surgery on for hiccups, III:1632 Phthirus pubis, III:1995 Phycomycosis. See Mucormycosis 3865 Phydomycosis for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 for subdural hematoma, IV:3205 with thyroid function tests, V:3309 toxic epidermal necrolysis from, V:3345 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:261 for trigeminal neuralgia, V:3391 Pheochromocytoma, I:59–60, IV:2577–2580 catecholamines in, II:677, 678 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 urinalysis for, V:3446 with vasodilators, V:3483 Philadelphia chromosome in chronic leukemia, III:1991 Philodendron poisoning from, IV:2644 Phimosis circumcision and, II:812, 813 Phlebitis Budd-Chiari syndrome from, I:610 from Buerger’s disease, I:611 from diazepam, IV:2984 with erythromycin, I:242 with hormone replacement therapy, III:2160 from hypercoagulation, III:1701 from lumpectomy, III:2037 from venography, V:3493 Phlebography. See Venography Phlebothrombosis. See Thrombophlebitis Phlebotomy, IV:2580–2581 for cor pulmonale, II:917 for ESR, II:1231 for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 for secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 Phlebovirus, III:1592 Phlegm, expectorants for, II:1253 PHN. See Shingles Phobias, I:322–323, 324, IV:2581–2584 antianxiety drugs for, I:231 anxiety from, I:319 benzodiazepines for, I:466 cognitive therapy for, II:840 vs. generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 from hypoglycemia, III:1735 MAO inhibitors for, III:2213 with obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2381 from Tourette syndrome, V:3344 See also Agoraphobia Phobic disorders. See Phobias Phocomelia. See Ectromelia Phonemic synthesis, I:417 Phylioguinone Phylioguinone. See Vitamin K Phylloquinone. See Phytonadione Physical abuse, I:16, 17, 18 PTSD from, IV:2685 somatoform disorders from, IV:3115 substance abuse and, IV:3211 Physical activity. See Exercise Physical allergy, IV:2591–2592 Physical examination, IV:2592–2595 before abortion, I:12 for abscess, I:14 for acne, I:25 for acute leukemia, III:1987–1988 for acute stress disorder, I:49 for AIDS, I:79 for alcoholism, I:97 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:137 for amytrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 aneurysmectomy and, I:193 for angiomas, I:494–495 for animal bites, I:499 for aortic valve insufficiency, I:328 for ascites, I:372 Balance and coordination tests in, I:438 for balanitis, I:440 for battered child syndrome, I:453 for bladder stones, I:510 of blood donors, I:525 for bone tumors, IV:2942 for botulism, I:561 for brain tumors, I:571, 572 for breast cancer, I:579, II:1324 for Budd-Chiari syndrome, I:610 for cancer, II:633–634 after cancer therapy, II:640, 743 for catatonia, II:676 for cervical cancer, II:713 for cervical disk disease, II:718–719 for children’s health, II:764 for chondromalacia patellae, II:795 for choriocarcinomas, II:797 chronic fatigue syndrome and, II:803 for chronic leukemia, III:1991–1992 for coagulation disorders, II:828 for colon cancer, II:850 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 for contact dermititis, II:909 for contractures, II:913 for decubitus ulcer, I:457 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1057 for electrolyte disorders, II:1155 for endometrial cancer, II:1189 before exercise, II:1251 for fecal incontinence, II:1300–1301 for fractures, II:1364 for FTT, II:1279 for gay and lesbian health, III:1416 for head and neck cancer, III:1516 for heart surgery, III:1544 for hepatitis, III:1607 3866 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1644 during HRT, III:1673 for hypercoagulation, III:1701 for hypertension, III:1722 for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777–1778 for impotence, III:1805 for infectious arthritis, III:1820 for intussusception, III:1855–1856 for jaundice, III:1883 for keratosis pilaris, III:1907 for laryngeal cancer, III:1951 for liver cancer, III:2020 for low back pain, III:2032 for lung cancer, III:2048 for mallet finger, III:2102 for maxillofacial trauma, III:2136 for men’s health, III:2165 for multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2237 for nasal polyps, IV:2316 with neurologic examination, IV:2350 for obstetrical emergencies, IV:2384 for palpitations, IV:2466 for paranoia, IV:2493 for pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2569 for placental abruption, IV:2613 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for precocious puberty, IV:2691 during pregnancy, IV:2386 prepregnancy, IV:2712–2713 for protein-energy malnutrition, IV:2744 for psychosis, IV:2766 for psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 for pulmonary valve stenosis, IV:2788 for restrictive cardiomyopathy, IV:2873 for rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 for RSV, IV:2868 for sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 for scoliosis, IV:2971 for sexual dysfunctions, II:1308, IV:3016 for situs inversus, IV:3060 for skin cancer, IV:3067 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for splenic trauma, IV:3141 for sports injuries, IV:3146–3147 for STDs, IV:3022 for stomach cancer, IV:3165 for stomach ulcer, V:3433 for stomatitis, IV:3170 for substance abuse, IV:3209 for tennis elbow, V:3252 for thoracic surgery, V:3288 for tinnitus, V:3322 for tonsillitis, V:3326 for tumors, V:3412 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3545 Physical mind method. See Pilates Physical postures, for yoga, V:3593, 3595, V:3596 Physical restraint for delirium, II:1022 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 psychiatric, IV:2760 Physical therapy, IV:2846–2847 for adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:94 Alexander technique in, I:104 for amputation, I:159 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 for arthroplasty, I:361 for arthroscopic surgery, I:364 for arthroscopy, I:366 for ataxia, I:388 for brain tumors, I:573 for bronchiectasis, I:597 for bunions, I:616 for burns, I:618–619 for cervical disk disease, II:718 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 chest, II:745–747 for children, II:764 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for contractures, II:913 for edema, II:1135 for electric shock injuries, II:1144 exercise for, II:1249–1251 for fractures, II:1365 for Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1370 for frostbite, II:1372 after heart surgery, III:1544 with heat treatment, III:1559 for heel spurs, III:1563 for hemophilia, II:829 for herniated disk, III:1628–1629 immobilization and, III:1781 for joint replacement, III:1892 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for kneecap removal, III:1928 for low back pain, III:2032 after lumpectomy, III:2037 for lung abscess, III:2039 for mastectomy, III:2130 for movement disorders, III:2222 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 with muscle relaxants, III:2259 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for occupational asthma, IV:2387 after orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for pain management, IV:2463 for paralysis, IV:2492 for Parkinson disease, IV:2501 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 for pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2569 after poliovirus, IV:2650 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Piezoelectric ceramic chips in Doppler ultrasonography, II:1097 in ultrasonography, I:4 Pigeon breeder’s lung. See Bird fancier’s lung Pigment cirrhosis. See Liver cirrhosis Pigmentation excess (See Hyperpigmentation) melanocytes and, III:2095 in photosensitivity, IV:2589 Pigmentation disorders, IV:3077–3079 from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 from cryotherapy, II:964 erythema nodosum, II:1227 excess (See Hyperpigmentation) excess pigmentation (See Hyperpigmentation) lack of pigmentation (See Hypopigmentation) laser surgery and, III:1959, 1962 from lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 from malnutrition, III:2104 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 from Whipple’s disease, III:2086 See also Photosensitivity disorders Pigs grafts, for burns, I:619 tapeworm infections in, V:3239 trichella spiralis in, V:3385 Pigweed allergic rhinitis from, I:111 Pilates, III:2226, IV:2600–2601 Pilates, Joseph, IV:2600 Pilates Studio, IV:2601 Piles. See Hemorrhoids Pilocarpine for glaucoma, III:1459 overdose, II:1104 Pilonidal abscess, I:13 Pimenta acris. See Bayberry Pimozide with antiarrhythmics, I:236 for psychosis, I:300 for Tourette syndrome, V:3344 Pimpinella anisum. See Aniseed Pimples. See Acne Pin-X. See Pyrantel pamoate Pindolol for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypertension, I:279–281 Pine for emphysema, II:1175 Pinguecula, IV:2601–2602, 2602 pterygium from, IV:2602 Pingueculae. See Pinguecula Pink eye. See Conjunctivitis Pinkeye. See Conjunctivitis Pins. See Bone nails; Dental pins Pinta, IV:2603–2604 Pintid lesions GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from pinta, IV:2603 Pinworm infection. See Enterobiasis Pioglitazone for diabetes, I:262, 263, IV:2617 Pipe smoking. See Smoking Piper methysticum. See Kava Piperacillin-tazobactam for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 Piperadines, I:277 Piperazines as antihistamines, I:277 for roundworm infections, IV:2924 Pipsissewa for urethritis, V:3441 Piracetam for Down syndrome, II:1100 Piriformis syndrome. See Sciatica Pissabed. See Dandelion Pitcher’s shoulder. See Rotator cuff injury Pitocin. See Oxytocin Pitressin. See Vasopressins Pitta dosha, in ayurvedic medicine, I:430 Pituitary adenoma causing acromegaly, I:34 prolactin test for, IV:2723 See also Pituitary tumors Pituitary apoplexy, IV:2607 Pituitary cancer. See Pituitary tumors Pituitary diseases carpal tunnel syndrome and, II:667 growth hormone tests for, III:1487, 1490 high cholesterol and, II:789 hirsutism from, III:1637 hypernatremia from, III:1710 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 hypokalemia from, II:1158 hyponatremia from, III:1742 hypothyroidism from, III:1756 in polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 prolactin test for, IV:2723 thyroid hormones and, V:3313 Pituitary dwarfism, IV:2604–2607, 2605f Pituitary fossa in hypophysectomy, III:1745 Pituitary gland with acromegaly, I:32 in amenorrhea, I:146 corticosteroids and, II:935 with corticotropin test, I:64–65 in diabetes insipidus, II:1046 FSH test for, II:1350 function of, IV:2607 growth hormone tests for, III:1487 histiocytosis and, III:1639 in hypogonadism, III:1738 hypopituitarism and, III:1746 3867 Pituitary gland for postpolio syndrome, IV:2684 for protein-energy malnutrition, IV:2744 for reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2840 for Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2852 for rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 for sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 for sciatica, IV:2964 for scoliosis, IV:2972 for shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 for silicosis, IV:3055 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 for spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 after stroke, IV:3197 for tennis elbow, V:3252 with therapeutic touch, V:3283 for thoracic outlet syndrome, V:3287 for torticollis, V:3341 for whiplash, V:3556 Physicians Desk Reference for Herbal Medicine, III:2121 Physiologic heart murmurs. See Heart murmurs Physiologic monitoring for acidosis, III:2179 in cardiac rehabilitation, II:659–660 for electric shock injuries, II:1144 with ESR, II:1231 after heart surgery, III:1544 after heart transplantation, III:1547–1548 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 for metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 Physiologic myopia. See Myopia Physiologic nodularity. See Fibrocystic condition of the breast Physiological myopia. See Myopia Physiotherapy exercises, III:1979 Phytanic acid, in Refsum disease, III:2004, 2005 Phytanic acid hydroxylase, III:2004 Phytic acid, III:2191 Phytoestrogens for menopause, III:2162–2163 for PMS, IV:2711 Phytolacca. See Poke root; Pokeweed Phytonadione for vitamin K deficiency, V:3519 Pica, IV:2595–2597 during pregnancy, IV:2697 from pregnancy, IV:2696 Pick’s disease dementia from, II:1024 The Pickwick Papers (Dickens), IV:2597 Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597–2598 PID. See Pelvic inflammatory disease Piercing, body, IV:2598–2600, 2598 Pituitary gland in lactation, III:1942 luteinizing hormone and, III:2056 in oligomenorrhea, IV:2388–2389 pituitary dwarfism and, IV:2604–2607, 2605 in puberty, IV:2407, 2772, 2773 in secondary hypothyroidism, III:1756 surgery of, III:1745–1746 Pituitary hormones in hyperpigmentation, III:1715 Pituitary tumors, IV:2607–2609, 2608 amenorrhea from, I:146 Cushing’s syndrome from, I:65 diabetes insipidus from, II:1046 galactorrhea from, III:1375 growth hormone tests for, III:1487 hypogonadism from, III:1738 hypophysectomy for, III:1745 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 Pityriasis rosea, IV:2609–2610, 2609 Pityrosporum ovale seborrheic dermatitis from, IV:2980 PKD. See Polycystic kidney disease; Pyruvate kinase deficiency PKD1 gene, IV:2652 PKLR gene, IV:2793 PKM gene, IV:2793 PKU. See Phenylketonuria Placenta abnormalities of in placenta previa, IV:2610 placental abruption from (See Placental abruption) recurrent miscarriages and, IV:2836 in childbirth, II:758 CVS and, II:799 with cytomegalovirus infections, II:999 defects fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 with esophageal atresia, II:1238 in gestational diabetes, III:1447 miscarriage and, III:2205 in multiple pregnancy, III:2248 oxygen flow electronic fetal monitoring for, II:1162 Placenta accreta, IV:2384 Placenta previa, IV:2610–2612 antepartum tests with, I:221 cesarean section for, II:725 prematurity from, IV:2706 Placental abruption, IV:2383, 2384, IV:2612–2613 cesarean section for, II:725 from eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2693 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 3868 prematurity from, IV:2706 Placental accreta, IV:2385 Placental preva, IV:2383, 2384–2385 Plague, III:2064, IV:2614–2617, 2615f, V:3599 vaccination for, V:3465 Planned Parenthood, IV:3022 Planned replacement lenses. See Contact lenses Plant alkaloids for chemotherapy, II:740 Plant estrogens. See Phytoestrogens Plant poisoning. See Poisoning, from plants Plantago. See Psyllium Plantago major. See Plantain Plantain for contact dermititis, II:910 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for urethritis, V:3441 Plantar callus. See Calluses Plantar fascia in heel spurs, III:1562 release of for heel spurs, III:1562 Plantar fasciitis fasciotomy for, II:1291 in heel spurs, III:1562 Plantar warts, II:1357, V:3548 Plants, medicinal. See Herbal medicine Plaque, IV:3074 in atherosclerosis, I:393 coronary heart disease from, II:929 dental (See Dental plaque) endarterectomy for, II:1180 in multiple sclerosis, III:2249–2250, 2252 in renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 Plaque psoriasis, IV:2755 Plaquenil. See Hydroxychloroquine Plasma blood donation and, I:525, 526 in blood glucose tests, I:530 blood transfusions of, V:3368 coagulation disorders and, II:826, 828, 829 in diabetes insipidus, II:1046 in electrolyte tests, II:1157 in hematocrit test, III:1571 in lymphocytopenia, III:2070 in mineral toxicity, III:2194 in partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507 in plasmapheresis, IV:2619 transfusions of for Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 for septic shock, IV:3005 Plasma antithrombin for hypercoagulation, III:1701 Plasma cell cancer Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 beta2-microglobulin test for, I:473 myltiple myeloma, III:2238 in Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3543 Plasma cell myeloma. See Multiple myeloma Plasma exchange for hemolytic uremic syndrome from E. coli, II:1237 for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 Plasma filtration in plasmapheresis, IV:2619 Plasma renin activity, IV:2617–2618 Plasmacytomas, III:2238, 2240, 2242, 2243 Plasmalogen for peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 Plasmapheresis, IV:2618–2620 for allergic purpura, I:110 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1493 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for Refsum disease, III:2005 for tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3395 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3546 Plasmodium, I:286 Plasmodium falciparum, III:2088 Plasmodium malariae, III:2088 Plasmodium ovale, III:2088 Plasmodium vivax, III:2088 Plastic frames. See eyeglass frames Plastic surgery, IV:2620–2622, 2621t after cancer therapy, II:640 for cutis laxa, II:978 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for fat removal, III:2009–2011 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for head and neck cancer, III:1517 for hermaphroditism, III:1847 with jaw fixation, III:1885 leeches for, III:1971 for leprosy, III:1979 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 for nasal trauma, IV:2318 for orbital fractures, III:2137 for scars, III:1938 skin resurfacing as, IV:3079 for sleep apnea, IV:3085 See also Blepharoplasty Plasticity (Learning), I:417 Plastics asthma from, I:380 multiple myeloma from, III:2239 Plasties. See Bone plates Platelet activating factor for Alzheimer’s disease, II:1024 Platelet aggregation inhibitors, I:250–252 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Plexopathy, IV:2550 Plicamycin with gout drugs, III:1480 for hypercalcemia, III:1698 lactate dehydrogenase levels and, III:1939 PLMD. See Nocturnal myoclonus PLMS. See Nocturnal myoclonus PLOD gene, II:1139 Plueral effusion. See Pleurisy PMDD. See Premenstrual dysphoric disorder PML. See Multifocal leukoencephalopathy PMS. See Premenstrual syndrome PND. See Paroxysmal dyspnea PNET. See Medulloblastomas Pneumatic retinopexy, IV:2877 Pneumatic vest for cardiopulmonary resuscitation, II:664 Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, II:762 Pneumococcal infections with splenectomy, IV:3139 vaccination for, V:3465 Pneumococcal meningitis, III:2154, 2155 Pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2633–2635 COPD and, II:810 Pneumoconiosis cor pulmonale from, II:917 Pneumocystis carinii lung abscess from, III:2039 pneumonia from, IV:2635, 2636 Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, I:76, 80 Pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2635–2637 antiprotozoal drugs for, I:298 with liver transplantation, III:2030 from SCID, IV:3010 sulfonamides for, IV:3216 Pneumonectomy, III:2045, 2053, 2054 Pneumonia, IV:2637–2641, 2639 from adenoviruses, I:56, 57, 58 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from animal bite infections, I:206 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:267 from appendectomy, I:340 from ARDS, I:68 aspiration (See Aspiration pneumonia) blood culture for, I:522 from bowel resection, I:564 breathing capacity and, III:1999 from bronchiectasis, I:596 from bronchitis, I:598 from brucellosis, I:606 with cancer, II:641 from cat-scratch disease, II:670 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 cephalosporins for, II:692 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:697 from Chagas’ disease, II:728 chest physical therapy for, II:745 chest x-ray for, II:747 from chickenpox, II:750 from Chlamydia, II:770–772 from coccidioidomycosis, II:835 with cold antibody hemolytic anemia, I:181 from colostomy, II:863 with complement deficiencies, II:874 cough from, II:941 from cutaneous larvae migrans, II:974 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:998, 1000 with Down syndrome, II:1099 dyspnea from, IV:3035 with E. coli infection, II:1235 ECMO for, II:1256 from emphysema, II:1173, 1175 empyema and, II:1175, 1176 endocarditis from, II:1183 enteral nutrition and, V:3402 from enterobacteriaceae, II:1204 with epiglottitis, II:1220 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 from foreign objects, II:1358 from gastroesophageal reflux, III:1553 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 Haemeophilus influenzae, III:1586, 1587 hemoptysis from, III:1589 hospital acquired, III:1674 from human parvovirus B19, II:1329 with immobilization, III:1782 from impetigo, III:1802 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 lipid, from lymphography, III:2066 lung abscess from, III:2039 with lung diseases, III:2051 with lung perfusion and ventilation scans, III:2052 from lung surgery, III:2054 with measles, III:2139 in men, III:2164 multiple sclerosis with, III:2253 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 mycoplasma (See Mycoplasma pneumonia) nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 after nephrectomy, IV:2332 from neutropenia, IV:2354 in newborns, from nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 vs. nocardiosis, IV:2358 3869 Pneumonia with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 Platelet aggregation test, IV:2623–2624, IV:2626 Platelet count, IV:2624–2625 with chemotherapy, II:640, 741–742 for coagulation disorders, II:828 for E. coli, II:1236 with hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 in Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 with liver biopsy, III:2017 with lung biopsy, III:2041 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 for platelet function disorders, IV:2626 with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, IV:2636 Platelet function disorders, IV:2625–2627 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 menorrhagia from, III:2170 from NSAIDs, I:175 platelet count for, IV:2624–2625 Plateletpheresis for thrombocytosis, V:3298 Platelets. See Blood platelets Platinol. See Cisplatin Platinol-AQ. See Cisplatin Plato, as vegetarian, V:3485 Plavix. See Clopidogrel Plegine. See Phendimetrazine Plethysmography. See Impedance phlebography Pleural biopsy, IV:2627–2628, IV:2632 Pleural cavity chest drainage therapy for, II:743 in empyema, II:1175 rheumatoid arthritis and, IV:2900 Pleural diseases biopsy for, IV:2627–2628 Pleural effusion, IV:2628–2630 biopsy for, IV:2627 with pleural tumors, IV:2628 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 thoracentesis and, V:3284 Pleural fluid analysis of (See Thoracentesis) paracentesis for, IV:2490 Pleural tumor, IV:2627–2628 Pleurisy, IV:2631–2633 from asbestosis, I:370 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 Pleurisy root, IV:2632 Pleuritis. See Pleurisy Pleurodynia, epidemic. See Epidemic pleurodynia Pleuroscopy. See Thoracoscopy Pneumonia orbital and periorbital cellulitis from, IV:2407 vs. parrot fever, IV:2506 from perinatal infection, IV:2540 from pleural biopsy, IV:2627 pleural effusion from, IV:2628, 2629, 2630 pleurisy from, IV:2631–2632 pneumococcal (See Pneumococcal pneumonia) pneumocystis (See Pneumocystis pneumonia) Pneumocystis carinii (See Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia) pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 from rubella, V:3339 from salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 from scrub typhus, IV:2977 with sickle cell anemia, III:1577 from Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3063 from smallpox, IV:3096 sputum culture for, IV:3149 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 streptococcal antibody tests for, IV:3180 from subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, IV:3201 from surgery, III:1427 tetracyclines for, V:3266 from tonsillitis, V:3328 from typhoid, V:3422 from typhus, V:3423 from urinary diversion, V:3452 with ventricular septal defect, V:3501 from Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 wheezing from, V:3554 from whooping cough, V:3558 in women, V:3576 from XLA, V:3585 Pneumonia vaccine with asbestosis, I:371 for complement deficiencies, II:874 for emphysema, II:1174 for silicosis, IV:3056 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 Pneumonic plague. See Plague Pneumothorax, IV:2641–2643, 2642 from bronchoscopy, I:605 chest drainage therapy for, II:743 chest x-ray for, II:747 dyspnea from, IV:3035, 3036 gas embolism and, III:1397 hyperbaric oxygen therapy and, IV:2451 from liver biopsy, III:2018 from mediastinoscopy, III:2145 with nitrous oxide, I:187 from pleural biopsy, IV:2627 3870 from respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 after sympathectomy, IV:3225 thoracentesis and, V:3284, 3285 from thoracoscopy, V:3291 from venous access, V:3494 PNS. See Peripheral nervous system Pnu-Imune, IV:3139 Pod-Ben-25. See Podophyllum resin Podagra. See Gout Podocon-25. See Podophyllum resin Podofilox for anal warts, I:173 for genital warts, III:1444 for warts, V:3549 Podophyllum for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for genital warts, III:1444 for papillomavirus, IV:2542 for warts, V:3549 Podophyllum resin, for anal warts, I:172–173 Poison black cherry. See Belladonna Poison control centers, IV:2645 for drug overdose, II:1105 for nasal trauma from chemical exposure, IV:2318 Poison ivy for chickenpox, II:751 delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1019 dermatitis from, II:1037 dermititis from, II:909, 910 local anesthesia for, I:190 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 rash from, IV:2820 See also Toxicodendron Poison oak dermatitis from, II:1037 dermititis from, II:909, 910 Poison sumac dermatitis from, II:1037 dermititis from, II:909, 910 Poisoning, IV:2643–2646, 2645t acidosis from, III:2179 by activated charcoal, I:367–368, II:731–732 alcohol (See Alcohol poisoning) anoxia from, I:216 carbon dioxide (See Carbon dioxide poisoning) carbon monoxide (See Carbon monoxide poisoning) carbon tetrachloride (See Carbon tetrachloride poisoning) from chemicals, IV:2643, 2644–2645 delirium from, II:1021, 1022 from digitalis, II:1073 from drugs (See Drug toxicity) electrolyte imbalance from, II:1157 fatty liver from, II:1298 food (See Food poisoning) gas (See Gas poisoning) gastric lavage for, IV:3169 insecticide, III:1841–1843 interstitial lung diseases from, III:1774 ipecac for, III:1857–1859 jaundice from, III:1882 lead (See Lead poisoning) lymphocyte tests for, III:2068 movement disorders from, III:2221 in Munchausen syndrome, III:2257 mushroom (See Mushroom poisoning) nasogastric suction for, IV:2320 neutrophilia from, III:1993 paralysis from, IV:2491 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2550, 2552 from pica, IV:2596 from plants, IV:2643–2644, 2645 vs. Reye’s syndrome, IV:2895 seizures from, IV:2986 Poisonous plants. See Toxic plants Poke root for mumps, III:2256 for rubella, IV:2927 for sinusitis, IV:3059 Pokeweed, for sore throats, IV:3120 Poland syndrome, IV:2661 Polar plant. See Rosemary Polaramine. See Dexchlorpheniramine Polarity balancing. See Polarity therapy Polarity therapy, II:1327, IV:2646–2648 Polarity yoga, IV:2646 Polaroid lenses for eyeglasses, II:1266 Polio. See Poliomyelitis Polio vaccine, IV:2650 children’s health and, II:762 immunologic deficiency syndromes and, III:1790 Salk, Jonas E. and, IV:2649 vaccination for, V:3465 Poliomyelitis, IV:2648–2651, 2650f aldolase and, I:99 electromyography for, II:1160 pericarditis from, IV:2538 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2549, 2551, 2554 postpolio syndrome and, IV:2683–2684 Raynaud disease from, IV:2823 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 vaccination for (See Polio vaccine) vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 from XLA, V:3585, 3586 Polioviruses encephalitis from, II:1177 Pollen GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Polyethylene, for joint replacement, III:1891 Polyethylene glycol for bowel preparation, I:563 with enterostomy, II:1210 Polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2662–2663, IV:2773 Polyhydramnios, IV:2663–2665 antepartum tests with, I:221 with esophageal atresia, II:1238 in gestational diabetes, III:1447 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 Polymenorrhea, II:1112 Polymerase chain reaction test for AIDS, I:80, 83, 85, 86 for ehrlichiosis, II:1142 for enteroviruses, II:1213 for genital warts, III:1444 for histocompatibility testing, V:3324 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for sarcomas, IV:2943 for syphilis, IV:3229 Polymers, in bone grafts, I:544 Polymorphisms, in brain proteins, II:952 Polymorphonuclear leukocyte. See Neutrophils Polymorphonuclear neutrophils in complete blood count, I:522 Polymorphous light eruption, IV:2589 Polymox. See Amoxicillin Polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2362, IV:2665–2666 Polymyositis, I:422, 423, III:2295, IV:2666–2668 vs. muscular dystrophy, III:2265 myoglobin levels and, III:2292 from Raynaud disease, IV:2823 Sjögren’s syndrome with, IV:3063 with vasculitis, V:3479 Polymyxin for furunculosis, I:537 kidney damage from, IV:2337 with rubella vaccine, V:3466 Polymyxin B for injuries, I:244 Polyneuropathy. See Peripheral neuropathy Polypectomy for rectal polyps, IV:2834–2835 Polypharmacy homeopathy. See Homeopathy Polyps barium enema for, I:447 colonic (See Colonic polyps) colorectal (See Colorectal polyps) endoscopy for, IV:3057 FOBT for, II:1302 intestinal (See Intestinal polyps) nasal (See Nasal polyps) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 rectal (See Rectal polyps) small intestinal (See Intestinal polyps) vocal cord (See Vocal cord polyps) Polysaccharide krestin for endometrial cancer, II:1191 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1648 Polysomnography, IV:2668–2670 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2870 for sleep apnea, IV:3085 for sleep apnea diagnosis, IV:3112 for sleep disorders, IV:3086 Polysporin. See Polymyxin B Polystyrene in splenic embolization, IV:3139 Polysyndactyly, IV:2661 Polythiazide for hypertension, I:279–281 Polyunsaturated fats, III:1708 Polyurethane for eyeglass lenses, II:1266 Polyuria dehydration from, II:1017 Polyvinyl alcohol in splenic embolization, IV:3139 Pompe’s disease. See Glycogen storage diseases Pontiac fever, III:1973 Pontocaine. See Tetracaine Poor man’s ginseng. See Goldenseal Popeye appearance from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 Porch index of speech ability for aphasia, I:335 Pork, trichella spiralis in, V:3385 Pornography, in child abuse, II:754 Porphyria cutanea symptomatica. See Porphyria cutanea tarda Porphyria cutanea tarda, III:1715, IV:2671, 2674 Porphyria variegata. See Variegate porphyria Porphyrias, IV:2670–2676 anxiety from, I:318 with barbiturates, I:446 with benzodiazepines, I:467 from hepatitis C, III:1604 peritonitis from, IV:2556 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 from physical allergy, IV:2592 with recurrent polyneuropathy, IV:2551 with sulfonamides, IV:3217 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3312 Porphyrins, IV:2365 Porphyritic polyneuropathy, IV:2550 Porphyromonas mastoiditis from, III:2134 Port-access coronary artery bypass, II:927 3871 Port-access coronary artery bypass allergies from, I:111 allergy tests for, I:123 asthma from, I:236, 380, III:2050 conjunctivitis from, II:903 itching from, I:285 wheezing from, V:3554 Pollution air (See Air pollution) allergies from, I:112 birth defects from, I:490 cancer from, II:633 detoxification of, II:1041–1042 industrial (See Industrial pollution) Polyarteritis enterica. See Reiter’s syndrome Polyarteritis nodosa paresthesia from, IV:2365 with vasculitis, V:3479 Polyarticular juvenile arthritis. See Juvenile arthritis Polyarticular juvenile rheumatoid arthritis. See Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis Polycarbonate for eyeglass lenses, II:1265, 1266 Polycystic disease cerebral aneurysm from, II:697 Polycystic kidney disease, IV:2651–2654, 2652 chronic kidney failure from, II:806 nephrectomy for, IV:2332 Polycystic ovary syndrome, III:1637, IV:2654–2658 amenorrhea from, I:147 dysfunctional uterine bleeding from, II:1112 endometrial cancer and, II:1189 luteinizing hormone test for, III:2056 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2389 prolactin test and, IV:2723 Polycythemia 2,3-DPG in, V:3419–3420 complete blood count for, I:521 erythropoietin test for, II:1234 hematocrit test for, III:1571 hemoglobin test for, III:1576 from kidney cancer, III:1910 Polycythemia rubra vera. See Polycythemia vera Polycythemia vera, IV:2658–2660 hemoglobin test for, III:1576 hypercoagulation from, III:1701 hypersplenism from, III:1718 phlebotomy for, IV:2580 platelet count for, IV:2624 vs. secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 Polycythemia Vera Study Group, IV:2658 Polydactyly, I:491, IV:2660–2662, 2661 Polydrug users, I:50, 52 Port wine stains Port wine stains, I:494, 495, 496, III:1715 Portable x-ray, II:748 Portal cirrhosis. See Liver cirrhosis Portal hypertension ascites from, I:372 bleeding varices from, I:516, 517 with Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2103 Portal vein bypass, IV:2676–2677 Portal veins esophageal varices and, I:516, 517 in liver transplantation, III:2029 ultrasonography for, I:4 Portals, in arthroscopy, I:365 Portavacal shunt. See Portal vein bypass PortCAB. See Port-access coronary artery bypass Porter’s lovage. See Osha Positive-end expiratory pressure, III:1839 Positive schizophrenia. See Schizophrenia Positron emission tomography, IV:2677–2678, 2677, for Alzheimer’s diesease, I:137 for brain tumor, I:571 for esophageal cancer, II:1240 for head injuries, III:1521 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 with mental status examination, III:2178 for movement disorders, III:2222 for myocardial ischemia, III:1869–1870 for seizures, IV:2986 Posse, Baron Nils, III:2125 Post-event sports massage. See Sports massage Post-hepatic jaundice, III:1883, 1884 Post-polio syndrome, IV:2650 Post splenectomy sepsis, IV:3142 Post-term pregnancy antepartum tests for, I:221 high-risk, III:1632 Post-traumatic osteoporosis. See Reflex sympathetic dystrophy Post-traumatic stress disorder, I:49–50, 323, IV:2685–2687 vs. acute stress disorder, I:49–50 vs. adjustment disorder, I:58 with binge eating disorder, I:481 binge eating disorder and, I:481 biofeedback for, I:482 cognitive therapy for, II:840 dissociative disorders with, II:1085 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2244 with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 in head injuries, III:1520 as malingering, III:2100, 2101 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 3872 from rape, IV:2818 Post-viral fatigue syndrome. See Chronic fatigue syndrome Postcoital test infertility and, III:1829 Postconcussion syndrome, II:880, III:1521, IV:2678–2679 Posterior nosebleed. See Nosebleed Posterior subcapular cataracts, II:673–675 Posterior uveitis, V:3461 Posterioranterior x-ray. See Chest x-ray Postexposure prophylaxis for rabies, I:208 Postherpetic neuralgia, IV:2339–2340 electric brain stimulation for, II:1146 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1144 from shingles, II:751, IV:3033 Postinfectious glomerulonephritis. See Acute poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis Postmarital therapy, III:2122 Postmaturity, stillbirth from, IV:3163 Postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2679–2681 Postmortem. See Autopsy Postnasal drip cough from, II:941 Postnatal conditions, cerebral palsy, II:703 Postnecrotic cirrhosis. See Liver cirrhosis Postoperative complications atelectasis as, I:390 cholestasis from, II:783 infection (See Surgical wound infection) from pyloroplasty, IV:2792 Postoperative pain from breast reconstruction, I:589 chest physical therapy for, II:745 from cholecystectomy, II:778 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 narcotics for, IV:2460 Postovulatory phase. See Ovulation Postpartum depression, IV:2681–2683 Postpartum fever. See Puerperal infection Postpartum hemorrhage, IV:2384, 2385 Postpartum infection, IV:2385 Postpartum period diabetes insipidus from, II:1047 hemolytic uremic syndrome in, III:1580 with multiple pregnancy, III:2248–2249 vs. PMS, IV:2710 sexual arousal disorder with, II:1308 Postpolio syndrome, IV:2683–2685 Postpoliomyelitis syndrome. See Postpolio syndrome Postprandial glucose test. See Blood glucose tests Postprandial hypoglycemia. See Hypoglycemia Postprimary tuberculosis. See Tuberculosis Poststreptococcal diseases antibody tests for, IV:3180–3182 Postsurgical pain. See Postoperative pain Postsurgical wound infection. See Surgical wound infection Postural drainage for atelectasis, I:391 for bronchiectasis, I:597 in chest physical therapy, II:746 for emphysema, II:1174 for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 Postural hypotension. See Orthostatic hypotension Postural instability, III:2222 from scoliosis, IV:2970 Posture Alexander technique and, I:103–105 catatonia and, II:676 catecholamines levels with, II:677 cervical disk disease and, II:719 with costochondritis, II:941 herniated disk and, III:1628, 1631 low back pain from, III:2031 pain from, IV:2422 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for sciatica, IV:2965 thoracic outlet syndrome and, V:3286 Postviral fatigue syndrome. See Chronic fatigue syndrome Pot marigold. See Calendula Potassium, II:1291, III:2196 with ACE inhibitors, I:204, 205 in acute kidney failure, I:45 with adrenal tumors, I:63 in aldosterone tests, I:100, 101 ammonia levels from, III:2024 in chronic kidney failure, II:806 deficiency of, III:2190–2193 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 ventricular fibrillation from, V:3499 in diabetes insipidus, II:1046 in diarrhea, I:265 with digitalis, II:1074 with diuretics, II:1089 for drug overdose, II:1106 in electrolyte disorders, II:1153, 1154, 1155 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 with enterostomies, II:1211 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 PRA test. See Panel reactive antibodies test Prader-Willi syndrome, IV:2687–2690 Prairie dogs, plague and, IV:2614 Prakriti, in ayurvedic medicine, I:430 Pralidoxime, for insecticide poisoning, III:1842 Pramipexole, for Parkinson disease, I:296, 297 Pramlintide, for hypoglycemia, III:1736 Pramoxine, for local anesthesia, I:190 Prana, I:430, V:3281, 3595 Pranayama, V:3593 Pravachol. See Pravastatin Pravastatin for high cholesterol, II:787, 789, 790 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 Prayer for anxiety, IV:2782 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 Praziquantel for fluke infection, II:1344 for parasitic disease, I:273, 274, 275 for schistosomiasis, IV:2955 for tapeworm disease, V:3241 Prazole for stomach ulcer, V:3434 Prazosin for BPH, I:129, 131 for hypertension, I:129, 131 Pre-event sports massage. See Sports massage Precancerous conditions, II:864 laser surgery for, III:1959 Precocious puberty, IV:2691–2692, IV:2772, 2773 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012, 3013, 3014 Precordial impulse from ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 Predictive testing. See Genetic testing Prednisone, II:935 for ABPA, I:108 for adrenal virilism, I:62 for amyloidosis, I:162 for angiomas, I:495 with antihelminthic drugs, I:275 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for bursitis, I:621 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for cluster headache, II:825 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885, 886 for Crohn’s disease, II:958 Cushing’s syndrome from, II:971 delirium from, II:1021 with dicyclomine, I:309 for encephalitis, II:1179 for facial paralysis, I:463 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for gastritis, III:1407 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for gout, III:1477 for headache, III:1524 for hives, III:1642 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646 for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1796, 1799 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for kidney transplantation, III:1921 leukocytosis from, III:1993 for liver transplantation, III:2029 in MOPP/ABVC chemotherapy, III:1646 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252, 2253 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2336 with periodic paralysis, IV:2544 for polymyositis, IV:2667 for relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854–2855 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305 for shingles, IV:3032 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for temporal arteritis, V:3248 for trichinosis, V:3386 for ulcerative colitis, V:3431 for vasculitis, V:3480 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3546 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 Preeclampsia, IV:2382, 2385, IV:2692–2694 amylase tests for, I:160 antepartum tests with, I:221, 223 cesarean section with, II:726 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 in high risk pregnancy, III:1632 induced labor with, III:1816 stillbirth from, IV:3163 Preemptive abortion. See Menstrual extraction Preexposure vaccination, I:207–208 Pregnancy, IV:2694–2699, 2696f with abdominal x-rays, III:1923 with ACE inhibitors, I:204 with adrenal gland scan, I:61 Alexander technique and, I:104 alkaline phosphatase and, I:106, 107 amenorrhea from, I:147, III:2169 amniotic fluid in, IV:2663–2664 anesthetics during, I:188 with anti-insomnia agents, I:283 with antiacne agents, I:227 with anticancer drugs, I:247 3873 Pregnancy excess of (See Hyperkalemia) with hyperaldosteronism, III:1694, 1695 in hypokalemia, III:1739–1741 kidney function tests for, III:1913 lactic acid and, III:1944 levels of with ascites, I:372, 373 in metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 in mushroom poisoning, III:2268 in myopathies, III:2295 in nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 for palpitations, IV:2466 with periodic paralysis, IV:2544 for prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2725 for renal tubular acidosis, IV:2857 toxicity, III:2193–2194 Potassium acetate, III:1740 Potassium bicarbonate, III:1740 Potassium chloride with abortion, I:8 in hyperkalemia, III:1704–1706 for hypokalemia, III:1740 for metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 for periodic paralysis, IV:2545 stool fats and, IV:3173 toxicity, III:2194 Potassium deficiency. See Hypokalemia Potassium hydroxide test. See KOH test Potassium iodine with adrenal gland scan, I:61 for sporotrichosis, IV:3143 Potassium permanganate for disinfection, V:3281 Potassium phosphate for hypophosphatemia and rickets, IV:2585 Potassium-sensitive PP. See Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis Potassium-sparing diuretics, II:1089 Potassium sulfide. See Hepar sulphuris Potato plant poisoning, IV:2643, 2644 Potential vision test, II:674 Poultices, for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 Poultry, V:3513 Poverty malnutrition from, III:2104 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2743 Povidone iodine, I:307 Powassan virus, I:347 Powders. See Talcum powder PPD tests for tuberculosis, V:3407–3408 PPS. See Postpolio syndrome PRA. See Plasma renin activity Pregnancy with anticoagulants, I:251 with anticonvulsants, I:254 with antihelminthic drugs, I:275 with antihistamines, I:278 with antimalarials, I:287 with antimigraine agents, I:290 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 with antiretroviral drugs, I:304 with antirheumatic drugs, I:306 with antithyroid agents, III:1724 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311, 313 with aortic coarctation, II:831 aplastic anemia from, I:337 arteriovenous malformation hemorrhage from, I:357 with aspirin, I:378 with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:302 with barbiturates, I:446 with benzodiazepines, I:467 beriberi and, I:469 with beta blockers, I:476 with blood glucose tests, I:529 blood transfusions and, V:3367 with bone nuclear medicine scan, I:555 with bone x-rays, I:556–557 breast self-examination during, I:591 with calcium channel blockers, II:627–628 calcium levels and, III:1713 cardiac blood pool scan and, II:654 carpal tunnel syndrome and, II:667 carpal tunnel syndrome during, II:667 with CAT scan, II:875 cerebral aneurysm from, II:698 cervical cancer and, II:716 chemonucleolysis and, II:739 with chest x-rays, II:748 chickenpox and, II:750, 752 cholestasis with, II:783 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:790 choriocarcinoma after, II:797 choriocarcinoma and, II:798 with coal tar, I:404 cocaine use and, II:832 coccyx injuries from, II:836 colposcopy during, II:864 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 cortisol test with, II:937 with cytomegalovirus infections, II:998–999, 999, 1000 with decongestants, II:1011 with Depo-Provera/Norplant, II:1031, 1032 with DES, II:1039–1040 with diabetes insipidus, II:1046 diazepam and, III:2259–2260 with diuretics, II:1089 3874 vs. dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1111 ectopic (See Ectopic pregnancy) after ectopic pregnancy, II:1133 in edema, II:1134 electronic fetal monitoring in, II:1161–1163 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1163 with epoetin, II:643 with erythromycins, II:1232 erythropoietin and, III:1793 fainting from, II:1280 fetal hemoglobin test and, II:1313 with fifth disease, II:1329 with fluoroquinolones, II:1345 folic acid and, II:1347, 1349, 1350 gallium scans and, III:1383 gallstones from, III:1388 with gastric emptying scan, III:1402 with genital herpes, III:1440 GI bleeding studies with, III:1449 gonorrhea and, III:1472, 1473 with guaifenesin, II:1254 heartburn from, III:1553 with Heimlich maneuver, III:1565 with hematocrit test, III:1572 with hemoglobin test, III:1576 hemorrhoids and, III:1593 hemorrhoids from, I:275 with hepatitis A, III:1596 with hepatitis E, III:1608 hernias from, III:1623 high risk (See High risk pregnancy) hirsutism from, III:1637 with hydralazine, V:3482 hydronephrosis from, III:1689 with hydroxyzine, I:285 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 hypogonadism after, III:1738 hysterosonography with, III:1768 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 indigestion from, III:1813 interferons and, III:1794 interstitial IUDs with, III:1876 with isotretinoin, I:226 itching from, III:1875 with kidney scans, III:1914 laser eye surgery and, IV:2586 with laser surgery, III:1959 with laxatives, II:906 with lindane, III:1995 with listeriosis, III:2012–2013, 2013 low back pain from, III:2031 luteinizing hormone test for, III:2056 with lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 with malaria, III:2090 malnutrition with, III:2103–2104 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 with measles, III:2140 melasma during, IV:3078 menopause and, III:2159 mifepristone and, III:2186 moles during, III:2210 with MRI, III:2082 multiple (See Multiple pregnancy) after myomectomy, III:2293 with nalidixic acid, V:3448 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 with nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 with opioid analgesics, I:177 pap smear during, IV:2485 periodic paralysis during, IV:2544 periodontal diseases and, IV:2547 phenylketonuria and, IV:2575 pica in, IV:2595 with plasma renin activity, IV:2617 polio and, IV:2648 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2703–2705 prepregnancy counseling, IV:2712–2713 prevention (See Birth control) prevention of (See Birth control) protein components test during, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis and, IV:2748 pulmonary hypertension and, IV:2785 with radiation therapy, III:2036, 2128, 2130 from rape, IV:2817–2818, 2819 rubella test with, IV:2928 sacroiliac joint in, IV:2931 salivary gland scan risk to, IV:2932 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012, 3013, 3014 sexual arousal disorder with, II:1308 smoking and, IV:3104 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 spider angiomas in, I:494 with spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 with sulfonamides, IV:3216–3217 with syphilis, IV:3228 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:268 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3234 technetium heart scan and, V:3246 teen substance abuse and, IV:3206 with tetracyclines, V:3267 therapeutic touch in, V:3282, 3283 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 with thyroid hormones, V:3313 thyroxine levels and, V:3310, 3312 with toxoplasmosis, V:3348 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 with triglycerides tests, V:3394 after tubal ligation, V:3398 tuberculosis and, V:3406 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Premature ejaculation, III:2168, IV:2699–2700, IV:3015–3017 sex therapy for, IV:3014 Valsalva maneuver for, V:3471 Premature infants. See Prematurity Premature labor, IV:2700–2702 after amniocentesis, I:155 after cervical conization, II:718 from DES exposure, II:1039, 1040 electronic fetal monitoring, II:1161 from fifth disease, II:1329 from incompetent cervix, III:1811 malaria and, I:287 with multiple pregnancy, III:2248–2249 from perinatal infection, IV:2540, 2541 from placenta previa, IV:2611 from placental abruption, IV:2613 with premature membrane rupture, IV:2705 prematurity from, IV:2706 with selective abortion, I:8 vs. stillbirth, IV:3162 from uterine fibroids, V:3458 See also Prematurity Premature menopause, IV:2702–2703 FSH test for, II:1350 from radiation therapy, II:1191 Premature rupture of membranes, IV:2385, IV:2703–2705 oligohydramnios from, IV:2664, 2665 prematurity from, IV:2706 Prematurity, IV:2706–2708 in breech birth, I:595 cerebral palsy and, II:701 circumcision with, II:813 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 from eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2693 with enterobacterial infections, II:1205 with hemophilus infections, III:1586 inhalation therapies with, III:1838–1841 with jaundice, III:1883 from multiple pregnancy, III:2247–2248, 2249 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328, 2329 newborn health and, IV:2700–2701 from premature membrane rupture, IV:2705 with respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2863 with selenium deficiency, III:2191 sudden infant death syndrome and, IV:3213, 3215 with undescended testes, V:3437 Premenopause. See Menopause Premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2708–2709 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Premenstrual syndrome, IV:2710–2711 caffeine with, II:626 from hypoglycemia, III:1735 intermittent explosive disorder with, III:1845 SSRIs for, IV:2990 Prenatal care, IV:2697–2698 for birth defect prevention, I:493 birth defects and, I:493 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:886 for congenital amputation, II:887–888 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for eclampsia/preeclampsia prevention, IV:2693, 2694 for esophageal atresia prevention, II:1238 for fetal growth retardation, III:1852 for folic acid deficiency anemia prevention, II:1349, 1350 for high risk pregnancy, III:1633–1634 infant mortality rates and, III:2200, 2201 mental retardation and, III:2174, 2176 for miscarriage prevention, III:2205 for multiple pregnancy, III:2248–2249 for premature labor prevention, IV:2701–2702 for prematurity prevention, IV:2708 rubella test and, IV:2928–2929 stillbirth from, IV:3163 sudden infant death syndrome and, IV:3213 Prenatal diagnosis, IV:2697 chromosome analysis in, III:1432, 1435 for coagulation disorders, II:829 for erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1229 for fifth disease, II:1329 for genetic disorders, III:1431, 1435, 1437–1438 for high risk pregnancy, III:1633 of lipidoses, III:2006 for myotonic dystrophy, III:2302 of Niemann-Pick disease, III:2005 for osteogenesis imperfecta, IV:2418 of perinatal infection, IV:2541–2542 for peroxisomal disorders, IV:2562 for retinoblastoma, IV:2885 for spina bifida, IV:3127 for stillbirth, IV:3163 for syphilis, IV:3230 for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, V:3570 XLA and, V:3585 Prenatal examination. See Prenatal care Prenatal exposure delayed effects, I:492, II:1329 3875 Prenatal exposure delayed effects uric acid tests and, V:3442 urinalysis for, V:3443, 3446 with uterine fibroids, V:3458 with vaccines, V:3467 varicose veins from, V:3476 with vasodilators, V:3482 vitamin A toxicity and, V:3522 with vulvovaginitis, V:3540 with x-ray gallbladder, III:1382, 1383 See also Birth defects; Gestational diabetes Pregnancy complications, IV:2697 from amniocentesis, I:155, 156 antenatal tests for, I:219–221 antepartum tests for, I:221 from bronchodilators, I:601 from caffeine, II:626 cesarean section for, II:724 fatty liver as, II:1298 folic acid deficiency anemia as, I:181 from glomerulonephritis, III:1462 high-risk pregnancy and, III:1632 iron deficiency anemia as, III:1860, 1861–1862 LCM and, III:2069 from NSAIDs, IV:2362 from perinatal infection, IV:2540–2541 with rubella, IV:2926, 2927 from SSRIs, IV:2991 from uterine fibroids, V:3458 Pregnancy-induced hypertension. See Hypertension Pregnancy tests, IV:2697 for amenorrhea, I:147 antepartum, I:221–223 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 with endometrial biopsy, II:1186 for home, III:1679, IV:2697 with hydatidiform mole, III:1684 before isotretinoin, I:226 for menstrual disorders, III:2170 for oligomenorrhea, IV:2389 with prochlorperazine, I:293 See also Antenatal tests; Human chorionic gonadotropin test Pregnancy toxemias, I:101 Pregnyl. See Human chorionic gonadotropin Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for sickle cell disease, IV:3046 Prelu-2. See Phendimetrazine Premature aging from cutis laxa, II:978 from ultraviolet light treatment, V:3436 Premature atrial beats. See Atrial ectopic beats Premature atrial complex. See Atrial ectopic beats Prenatal genetic counseling Prenatal genetic counseling, III:1429–1431 See also Genetic counseling Prenatal surgery, for congenital amputation, II:887 Prenatal tests. See Prenatal diagnosis Prenatal ultrasonography, I:219–220, IV:2525–2527 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for polyhydramnios and oligohydramnios, IV:2664 in premature labor, IV:2701 Preovulatory phase. See Ovulation Prepregnancy counseling, IV:2712–2713 Prepuce, circumcision of. See Female genital mutilation Presbycusis, III:1528, IV:2997, 2999–3000 Presbyopia, II:673, IV:2713–2715 eyeglasses and contact lenses for, II:1265, 1267 senior’s health and, IV:2997, 2999 Presbyosmia, IV:3099 Presenilin with Alzheimer’s disease, I:135 Presidential Special Oversight Board, III:1495 Pressure (Therapeutic) for wounds, V:3582 Pressure bandages for elephantiasis, II:1168 for skin lesions, IV:3076 Pressure points (Acupressure). See Acupuncture points Pressure ulcers. See Decubitus ulcer Presyncope. See Fainting Prevacid. See Iansoprazole Prevalite. See Cholestyramine resin Preven, for abortion, I:9 Preventive surgery, for cancer, II:635 Prevotella, mastoiditis from, III:2134 PreVue, for Lyme disease, III:2059 Priapism, IV:2715–2716 drug-induced, III:1806 from sickle cell disease, IV:3044 from sildenafil citrate, IV:3054 Prick test. See Percutaneous allergy tests Prickly ash for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for tennis elbow, V:3253 Prickly heat, IV:2716–2717 Priessnitz, Vinzenz, III:1691 Priest’s crown. See Dandelion Prilocaine, III:2183–2184 Prilosec. See Omeprazole Primacor. See Milrinone lactate Primal therapy, III:1676 Primaquine G6PD and, III:1465 3876 for malaria, I:286, III:2090 for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 sensitivity to (See Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency) Primary adrenocortical insufficiency. See Addison’s disease Primary aldosteronism. See Hyperaldosteronism Primary biliary cirrhosis, IV:2717–2718, 2718 Primary bone cancer. See Osteosarcoma Primary brain tumors. See Brain tumors Primary cardiomyopathy. See Congestive cardiomyopathy Primary chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy; Neoadjuvant chemotherapy Primary ciliary dyskinesia situs inversus with, IV:3060 Primary cutaneous malignant melanoma, III:2095–2096 Primary enuresis. See Bed-wetting Primary histoplasmosis, III:1639–1641 Primary hypothyroidism. See Hypothyroidism Primary insomnia. See Insomnia Primary osteoarthritis. See Osteoarthritis Primary progressive pattern in multiple sclerosis, III:2250 Primary pulmonary blastomycosis, I:513 Primary sclerosing cholangitis, II:774 Primary seizures, IV:2985 Primary Sjögren’s syndrome. See Sjögren’s syndrome Primary Sjörgren’s syndrome. See Sjögren’s syndrome Primatene. See Epinephrine Primates monkeypox from, III:2212 Primaxin. See Imipenem Primidone with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 for seizures, IV:2986 for tremor, V:3381 Primitive neurodectal tumors. See Medulloblastomas Prinivil. See Lisinopril Prion, in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, II:951, 952–953 Prisms, for nystagmus, IV:2372 PRK. See Photorefractive keratectomy; Radial keratotomy Pro-banthine. See Propantheline bromide Pro time. See Prothrombin time, test of Proanthocyanidins aging and, I:71 ProBanthine. See Propantheline bromide Probeneaid. See Colchicine Probenecid with aspirin, I:379 with bismuth subsalicylate, I:266 for gout, I:282, III:1477, 1479 for hyperuricemia, I:282 neutropenia from, IV:2354 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Probiotics after colonic irrigation, II:856 for gastroenteritis, III:1409–1410 Procainamide for arrhythmias, I:353 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 for heart arrhythmia, I:233 for heart attacks, III:1534 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788 lactate dehydrogenase levels and, III:1940 pleurisy from, IV:2631 serum sickness from, IV:3008 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3233 Procaine for local anesthesia, I:190 with sunscreens, IV:3221 Procaine penicillin G for rat-bite fever, IV:2822 Procan. See Procainamide Procanbid. See Procainamide Procarbazine for brain tumors, I:572 delirium from, II:1021 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646 in MOPP/ABVC chemotherapy, III:1646 pleurisy from, IV:2631 Procardia. See Nifedipine Process addictions, I:50, 51, 52 Processus vaginalis, III:1686 Prochlorperazine with estrogens, III:1670 for nausea and vomiting, I:292–294 for psychosis, I:300 Procidentia, IV:2835 See also Uterine prolapse Procrit. See Epoetin; Erythropoietin Proctitis, I:210–211, 211, III:1416, IV:2719–2720 Proctoscopy for anal cancer, I:170 for anorectal disorders, I:210 for proctitis, IV:2719 Proctosigmoidoscopy vs. barium enema, I:448 Procyclidine, for Parkinson disease, I:296 Prodium. See Prednisone Prodrome, in cold sores, II:844 Productive pain, I:174 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Projective techniques, IV:2764 for personality disorders, IV:2565 Prokinetic agents for heartburn, III:1554 for indigestion, III:1815 Prolactin in amenorrhea, I:147 in galactorrhea, III:1375 test of, IV:2722–2724 Prolactin deficiency hypopituitarism, III:1747, 1748 Prolapsed disk. See Herniated disk Prolapsed hemorrhoids. See Hemorrhoids Prolapsed umbilical cord, IV:2384, 2385 Prolastin for emphysema, II:811 Proliferative breast disease. See Epithelial hyperplasia Proliferative retinopathy. See Retinopathy Prolixin neutropenia from, IV:2353 Prolonged erection. See Priapism Prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2724–2726 PROM. See Premature rupture of membranes Promethazine, for allergies, I:277, 278 Promotility agents, for pancreatectomy, IV:2469 Pronation, heel spurs from, III:1562 Proneal muscular atrophy. See CharcotMarie-Tooth disease Pronestyl. See Disopyramide Pronestyl-SR. See Procainamide Propafenone, for heart attacks, III:1534 Propantheline bromide heartburn from, III:1553 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 Propecia. See Finasteride Propentofylline, for Alzheimer’s disease, II:1026 Prophylactic immunizations, III:1463 Prophylactic radiation therapy, III:2049 Prophylactic surgery. See Preventive surgery Prophylaxis, IV:2726–2727 for AIDS, I:80 antiviral drugs for, I:315–316 cephalosporins for, I:241 for cystitis, II:993 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for STDs, IV:2818–2819 Propionibacterium acnes, I:24 Propofol, for general anesthesia, I:187 Propoxyphen, for pain, I:174 Propoxyphene with alprazolam, I:233 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for pain, I:175 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 withdrawal from, V:3572 Propoxyphene-acetaminophen, I:175 Propranolol, I:475 with aldosterone test, I:101 with antimalarials, I:288 with antimigraine agents, I:291 for anxiety, I:321 for bleeding varices, I:517 with bronchodilators, I:602 with caffeine, II:626 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for conduct disorder, II:884 for coronary heart disease, II:931 for cyclic vomiting syndrome, II:981 with decongestants, II:1012 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypertension, I:279–281 for mitral valve prolapse, III:2208 with myasthenia gravis, III:2275 parathyroid hormone test and, IV:2495 for phobias, IV:2583 with prazosin, I:131 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 with thyroid function tests, V:3309 for thyroiditis, V:3320 for tremor, V:3381 Proprioception in movement disorders, III:2222 Proptosis. See Exophthalmos Propulsid. See Cisapride Propylene glycol with minoxidil, III:2202 Proscar. See Finasteride ProSom. See Estazolam Prospect Hill virus. See Hantaviruses Prostacyclin. See Epoprostenol Prostaglandins aspirin and, I:378 dysmenorrhea and, II:1117, III:2169 for erectile disorders, IV:3017 for glaucoma, III:1459 heartburn from, III:1553 in histiocytosis, III:1638–1639 in induced labor, III:1816 kidney damage from, IV:2337 Prostate abscess of from prostatitis, IV:2741 acid phosphatase and, I:23 in benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 3877 Prostate Profasi. See Human chorionic gonadotropin Profiling acute homeopathic prescribing and, III:1657 constitutional homeopathy and, III:1661 homeopathy and, III:1664, 1665 Progesterone for amenorrhea, I:147 in dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 with ectopic pregnancy, II:1131 in endometrial cancer, II:1186 endometrial cancer and, II:1188, 1191 heartburn from, III:1553 hermaphroditism from, III:1846 for HRT, III:1672–1673 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1707 for hypogonadism, III:1738 IUDs with, III:1876 menopause and, III:2160, 2163 mifepristone and, III:2186 for miscarriage, III:2205 in multiple pregnancy, III:2247 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 in PMS, IV:2710 protein components test and, IV:2745 for recurrent miscarriage, IV:2837 with sex hormone tests, IV:3012, 3013 Progesterone assay, IV:3013 Progesterone challenge test, III:1673 Progestins for amenorrhea, III:2171 for birth control, IV:2402 for contraception, II:1031–1032 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for endometriosis, II:1194 with face lift, II:1275 for galactorrhea, III:1376 HRT and, III:1669, 1672 in puberty, IV:2772 See also Norplant Progestogens. See Progestins Prograf. See Tacrolimus Programmed senescence, I:70 Progressive external ophthalmoplegia. See Ocular myopathy Progressive Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647 Progressive massive fibrosis from black lung disease, I:506 Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720–2721 Progressive myopia. See Myopia Progressive supranuclear palsy, IV:2721–2722 movement disorders from, III:2221 ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2395 Progressive systemic sclerosis. See Scleroderma Prostate drainage of for prostatitis, IV:2741 enlarged (See Benign prostatic hypertrophy) infection sexual dysfunctions with, IV:3016 in infertility, III:1832 inflammation of vs. nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 Prostate biopsy, IV:2727–2730 for prostate cancer, IV:2731 prostate ultrasound and, IV:2736 PSA test and, IV:2735 Prostate cancer, II:631, 632, 634, 636, IV:2730–2734 acid phosphatase test for, I:23 androgens and, I:246 brachytherapy for, IV:2815 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 digital rectal examination for, IV:2833 erection disorders from, IV:3051 ethnic differences in, III:2199 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 gynecomastia from, III:1497 hydronephrosis from, III:1689 hypophysectomy for, III:1745 laparoscopy for, III:1948 from obesity, IV:2373, 2378 prostate biopsy for, IV:2727–2729 prostate-specific antigen in, V:3413–3414 prostate ultrasound for, IV:2736–2737 prostatectomy for (See Prostatectomy) PSA test for, IV:2734–2735 radiation therapy for, II:639, IV:2810 spinal metastasis of, III:2031 statistics on, III:2166 See also Prostate Prostate fluid test, I:513 Prostate gland. See Prostate Prostate-specific antigen test, III:2165, 2201, IV:2731, IV:2734–2735, V:3412, 3413–3414 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 for prostate cancer, IV:2729 prostate ultrasound and, IV:2736 Prostate surgery epididymitis from, II:1219 with Peyronie’s disease, IV:2572 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 Prostate ultrasound, IV:2736–2737 Prostatectomy, IV:2737–2739 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1203 impotence from, IV:2531 for prostate cancer, IV:2733 3878 for prostatitis, IV:2741 PSA test after, IV:2735 Prostatic acid phosphatase vs. acid phosphatase, I:23 Prostatic diseases with epididymitis, II:1218 sitz bath for, IV:3061, 3062 Prostatic hyperplasia. See Benign prostatic hypertrophy Prostatic hypertrophy, benign. See Benign prostatic hypertrophy Prostatitis, III:2167, IV:2739–2742 acute kidney failure from, I:44 cystitis from, II:992 prostate ultrasound and, IV:2736 Prostatodynia, IV:2740, 2741 Prostatron for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1203 ProStep. See Smoking cessation drugs Prosthetics breast vs. breast reconstruction, I:586 for congenital amputation, II:887 dental (See Dental prosthesis) ear, II:1123 eye, III:2185 hip, III:1891 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 knee, III:1891 orthopedic surgery and, IV:2410 in plastic surgery, IV:2621 sarcomas and, IV:2944 staphylococcal infections from, IV:3157, 3159 voice with head and neck cancer, III:1517, 1518 Prostigmine. See Neostigmine Prostimine, for myasthenia gravis, II:794 Prostrate stones, IV:2740 Protease inhibitors, IV:2742–2743 for AIDS, I:80 drug interactions with, II:1102, 1103 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for retrovirus diseases, I:303–304 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Protective clothing, for contact dermititis, II:909, 910 Protective devices for concussion avoidance, II:880 for hypothermia prevention, III:1755 for keratitis prevention, III:1906 for nasal trauma, IV:2319 with patient isolation, III:1873 for silicosis prevention, IV:3056 for wound prevention, V:3583 Protective equipment. See Protective devices Protectors (Herbal medicine), III:1619 Protein C hypercoagulation from, III:1701 Protein-calorie malnutrition. See Protein-energy malnutrition Protein complexes in allergic purpura, I:110 in Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 Protein components test, IV:2626, IV:2745–2746 Protein deficiency from carbohydrate intolerance, II:649 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2744 Protein electrophoresis, III:1788, IV:2746–2748 for multiple myeloma, III:2240 serum, III:1788 for Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3545 Protein energy malnutrition enteral nutrition for, V:3400, 3401 Protein-energy malnutrition, IV:2743–2745 from starvation, IV:3161 Protein-restricted diet for Fabry’s disease, III:2005 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 Protein S hypercoagulation from, III:1701 Proteinaceous infectious particle. See Prion Proteins, IV:2367 in amyloidosis, I:161, 162 in breast milk, III:1942 in chronic kidney failure, II:807 in complement deficiencies, II:874 in diabetes mellitus, II:1050 in diets, III:1708 encephalitis from, II:1177 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 function of, IV:2745 in Hartnup disease, III:1511 in hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1775, 1776 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706 for hypoglycemia, III:1737 in interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 intoxication from sclerotherapy, IV:2970 kidney function tests for, III:1912–1913, 1914 for lead poisoning, III:1967 loss of in nephrotic syndrome, IV:2334–2335 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2085 occupational asthma from, IV:2386 in Refsum disease, III:2004 retention GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 trichomoniasis from, V:3387 Protozoal diseases drugs for, I:273–275, 298–299 vs. enterobacterial infections, II:1205–1206 with hypokalemia, III:1739 Protriptyline for depression, I:258 Protruded disk. See Herniated disk Protrusio acetabluae from Marfan syndrome, III:2115 Proventil. See Albuterol Provera. See Progestins Provings homeopathy and, III:1663 Provocation tests for allergic rhinitis, I:112 for allergies, I:118, 122–123, 124 Proximal gastric vagotomy, V:3470 Proximal renal tubular acidosis, IV:2858 Prozac. See Fluoxetine PrP. See Brain proteins Prunus serotina. See Wild cherry bark Pruritus. See Itching Pruritus gravidarum from cholestasis, II:783 Prusiner, Stanley, II:952 PSA test. See Prostate-specific antigen test PSE. See Pseudoxanthoma elasticum Pseudocysts ascites from, I:371 Pseudoephedrine, I:406 with antimigraine agents, I:291 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 for congestion, II:1012 for deviated septum, II:1045 ischemia and, III:1871 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Pseudohemophilia, V:3531–3535 Pseudohermaphrodism. See Hermaphroditism Pseudohypertrophic muscular dystrophy. See Duchenne muscular dystrophy Pseudomembranes in antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 Pseudomembranous enterocolitis. See Antibiotic-associated colitis Pseudomonas aminoglycosides for, I:150 from animal bites, I:206 bacteremia from, I:436 cultures for, V:3579 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 Pseudomonas aeruginosa antibiotics for, I:241 corneal ulcers from, II:922 empyema from, II:1176 mastoiditis from, III:2134 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 osteomyelitis from, IV:2420 otitis externa from, IV:2431 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2750–2752 sputum culture for, IV:3150 Pseudomonas cepacia. See Burkholderia cepacia Pseudomonas infections, I:206, IV:2750–2752 Pseudomonas pseudomallei, III:2150–2151 Pseudoparathyroidism, IV:2585 Pseudophakic bullous keratopathy, II:919 Pseudostrabismus. See Strabismus Pseudoxanthoma elasticum, II:697, IV:2753–2755 Psittacosis. See Chlamydia pneumoniae; Parrot fever PSK. See Polysaccharide krestin Psoas abscess, I:14 Psoralen, with ultraviolet light treatment, V:3436 Psoralen plus ultraviolet A. See photochemotherapy Psoriasis, IV:2755–2758, 2757 with aldesleukin, III:1792 from ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 with antiarrhythmics, I:235 with antimalarials, I:287 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 with beta blockers, I:476 vs. cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976 vs. fungal infections, III:1929 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795, 1796 itching from, III:1874 with juvenile arthritis, III:1894 nail removal for, IV:2309 vs. Paget’s disease of the breast, IV:2457–2458 penile cancer and, IV:2530 salicylates for, II:1105 skin lesions from, IV:3075 ultraviolet light treatment for, V:3435 uveitis from, V:3461 Psoriatic arthritis, IV:2758–2760 Psoriatic arthritis mutilans, IV:2758 Psoriatic juvenile arthritis. See Juvenile arthritis Psoric miasm. See Miasms PSP. See Progressive supranuclear palsy PSS. See Post splenectomy sepsis Psychedelics. See Hallucinogens Psychiatric agents. See Antipsychotic agents Psychiatric confinement, IV:2760 Psychiatric evaluation for drug overdose, II:1106 3879 Psychiatric evaluation from kidney transplantation, III:1922 for strongyloidiasis, V:3292 triglycerides tests for, V:3394 urinalysis for, V:3446 See also specific proteins Proteinuria from Alport’s syndrome, I:131 from APSGN, I:48 of the kidneys, III:1776 Proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1775–1776 Proteus cultures for, V:3579 cystitis from, II:992 enterobacterial infections from, II:1204 mastoiditis from, III:2134 for scrub typhus tests, IV:2977 Proteus klebsiella, V:3457 Proteus mirabilis, IV:2431 Prothrombin with cephalosporins, I:242 with coagulation disorders, II:827, 828, 829 in hypercoagulation, III:1701 PT test for, IV:2748–2750 vitamin K deficiency and, V:3519 Prothrombin time for coagulation disorders, II:828 with liver biopsy, III:2017 liver function tests for, III:2024–2027, 2027 with partial thromboplastin time, IV:2508 test of, IV:2626, IV:2748–2750, 2749f for coagulation disorder, II:828 for vitamin K deficiency, V:3519 Protocoproporphyria. See Variegate porphyria Proton beam radiosurgery, IV:2608 Proton-pump inhibitors, III:1567 vs. antacids, I:218 for gastrinomas, III:1404 for gastritis, III:1406 for heartburn, III:1554 for stomach ulcers, I:308 for ulcers, I:313–314 Proton radiation, IV:2811–2812 Protonapia, II:859 Protoporphyrinogen oxidase, IV:2673 Protostat. See Metronidazole Protozoa, I:298 balantidiasis from, I:440–441 brain abscess from, I:566 corneal ulcers from, II:921 in cryptosporidiosis, II:967 cyclosporiasis from, II:981 leishmaniasis from, III:1975–1977 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 pneumocystis pneumonia from, IV:2635 Psychiatric evaluation for gender identity disorder, III:1418 with psychiatric confinement, IV:2760 for substance abuse, IV:3210 Psychic trauma brief psychotic disorder from, IV:2765 PTSD from, IV:2685 Psychoactive agents for children, II:765 cocaine as, II:831 delirium from, II:1021 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for palliative cancer therapy, II:642 See also Antipsychotic agents Psychoanalysis, IV:2760–2763 Psychoanalytic psychotherapy, IV:2566, 2760–2763 Psychodidae bartonellosis from, I:452 leishmaniasis from, III:1975 Psychodynamic therapy, III:1485, IV:2761 Psychoeducational tests for learning disorders, III:1969 Psychogenic polydipsia vs. diabetes insipidus, II:1047 from Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 overhydration from, IV:2449 Psychogenic sexual dysfunctions. See Sexual dysfunctions Psychological debriefing for PTSD, IV:2686, 2687 Psychological exams. See Psychological tests Psychological problems from celiac disease, II:682 from cesarean section, II:727 from Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, III:1983–1984 from obesity, IV:2374 from Prader-Willi syndrome, IV:2688–2689 premature ejaculation from, IV:2699 from schizophrenia, IV:2958–2963 from Tourette syndrome, V:3341–3343 from Wilson disease, V:3567 See also Mental disorders Psychological self-improvement, III:1676 Psychological tests, IV:2763–2765 for alcoholism, I:97 for amnesia, I:152 for children, II:764 for cochlear implants, II:838 for delusions, II:1023 for dissociative disorders, II:1087 for hypochondriasis, III:1733 for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 for malingering, III:2101 for personality disorders, IV:2565 3880 for psychosis, IV:2766 for psychosocial disorders, IV:2768 for sleep disorders, IV:3091 for stress, IV:3185 Thematic Apperception Test, V:3279–3280 Psychological Types (Jung), III:2286 Psychomotor disorders from heavy metal poisoning, III:1560 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 movement disorders and, III:2221 Psychomotor performance in dizziness, II:1094 with Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369, 1370 with mental retardation, III:2174 neurologic examination for, IV:2350, 2352 with PSP, IV:2721 See also Movement disorders Psychomotor retardation from bipolar disorder, I:486 Psychophysiologic disorders vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2244 low back pain as, III:2032 vs. malingering, III:2100 Psychophysiological insomnia, III:1843 Psychoses. See Psychotic disorders Psychosocial disorders, III:2198, IV:2767–2769 Psychosocial effects of enterostomies, II:1211 of heat treatment, III:1559 of mastectomy, III:2129, 2130 Psychosocial therapy for ADHD, I:412 for depression, II:1035 for gender identity disorder, III:1418 for psychosis, IV:2766 for sickle cell disease, IV:3047 Psychostimulants for ADHD, I:412, 412t Psychosurgery, I:321, IV:2769–2771 Psychotherapy for acute stress disorder, I:49 for ADHD, I:412 for adjustment disorders, I:59 for anorexia nervosa, I:213 for anxiety, I:321 for anxiety disorders, I:323–324, III:1428 aromatherapy in, I:352 art therapy as, I:367–369 for battered child syndrome, I:453 for bed-wetting, I:455 for binge eating disorder, I:481 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for bulimia, I:613 for children, II:764 for conduct disorder, II:884 for delusions, II:1023 for dementia, II:1026 for depression, II:1035 for dissociative disorders, II:1087 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 for enterostomy patients, II:1211 for factitious disorders, II:1278 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for gender identity disorder, III:1418 for hysteria, III:1764 for impotence, III:1805 for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 for low back pain, III:2032 for mania, III:2113 mental status examination with, IV:2351 for mood disorders, III:2217 for Munchausen syndrome, III:2258 music therapy and, III:2269 for paranoia, IV:2494 for paraphilias, IV:3019 for personality disorders, IV:2566 for pervasive developmental disorders, IV:2569 for phobias, I:73, IV:2582 with phototherapy, IV:2591 with plastic surgery, IV:2622 for postpartum depression, IV:2682 for psychosocial disorders, IV:2768 after psychosurgery, IV:2770 for PTSD, IV:2686 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 for schizophrenia, IV:2962 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979, 2980 for self mutilation, IV:2994 for sex change surgery, IV:3011 for sexual dysfunctions, II:1308, 1309, IV:3016 for sickle cell anemia, I:183 for sleep disorders, IV:3092 for stress reduction, IV:3190 for substance abuse, I:52, IV:3210 for Tourette syndrome, V:3343 for vaginal pain, V:3469 See also Cognitive therapy; Marriage counseling; Psychoanalysis; Psychodynamic therapy Psychotic depression vs. schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 Psychotic disorders, IV:2765–2767 amenorrhea from, I:147 with benzodiazepines, I:232 from dementia, II:1025 due to general medical condition, IV:2765–2766 with group therapy, III:1485 hallucinations from, III:1504 from hypercalcemia, III:1697 hyponatremia from, III:1743 from LSD, III:2074 mental status examination for, IV:2351 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis, IV:2775–2776 Pulmonary angiography, I:198 for pulmonary embolism, II:1170 before thoracic surgery, V:3288 Pulmonary anthrax, I:224 Pulmonary artery in congenital heart disease, II:899 embolism in, IV:2780 perforation of from pulmonary artery catheterization, IV:2777 in transposition of the great arteries, V:3373 Pulmonary artery banding, III:1543 for congenital heart disease, II:900 Pulmonary artery catheterization, IV:2776–2778 for pulmonary edema, IV:2778 for septic shock, IV:3005 Pulmonary aspergillosis, I:375–377 Pulmonary atresia surgery for, III:1543 Pulmonary capillaries in ARDS, I:67 Pulmonary damage. See Lung damage Pulmonary diseases. See Lung diseases Pulmonary edema, IV:2778–2778 from Alport’s syndrome, I:131 chest x-ray for, II:747 from heart failure, II:1134, III:1537 inhalation therapies for, III:1839 phlebotomy for, IV:2580 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 Pulmonary embolism, II:1169–1171, II:1170, III:1701, IV:2779–2781, 2780 from arthroscopy, I:366 from bowel resection, I:564 CAT scan for, II:878 from cesarean section, II:726 with chest physical therapy, II:745 from colostomy, II:863 cor pulmonale from, II:917 from deep vein thrombosis, II:1013 dyspnea from, IV:3036 fibrin split products and, II:1319–1320 hemoptysis from, III:1589 impedance phlebography for, III:1800 nuclear imaging for, III:2052 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 pulmonary angiography for, I:198 pulmonary hypertension from, IV:2785 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3129 from thrombophlebitis, V:3300–3301 from traumatic amputations, V:3378 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from urinary diversion, V:3452 vena cava filter for prevention, V:3490–3491 Pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 Pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2781–2783 from extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1716 from interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 Pulmonary function tests. See Respiratory function tests Pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785–2786 cor pulmonale from, II:917 ECMO for, II:1256 for Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597 from pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 with pulmonary valve insufficiency, IV:2786 Raynaud disease from, IV:2823 Pulmonary incompetence. See Pulmonary valve insufficiency Pulmonary infiltrates with pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 Pulmonary melioidosis. See Melioidosis Pulmonary mucormycosis. See Mucormycosis Pulmonary regurgitation. See Pulmonary valve insufficiency Pulmonary rehabilitation for COPD, II:811 Pulmonary scintiphotography. See Lung perfusion scan Pulmonary shunt for congenital heart disease, II:902 Pulmonary stenosis. See Pulmonary valve stenosis Pulmonary thrombosis from heart surgery, III:1544 Pulmonary tuberculosis, V:3406 Pulmonary tularemia, V:3411 Pulmonary valve cardiac catheterization for, II:656 in congenital heart disease, II:899, 900 in endocarditis, II:1182 obstruction of from myxoma, III:2306 in pulmonary valve stenosis, IV:2787–2788 in pulmonary valve insufficiency, IV:2786 replacement of, III:1550–1552 Pulmonary valve insufficiency, IV:2786–2787, V:3472 from endocarditis, II:1183 heart valve repair for, III:1550 Pulmonary valve regurgitation. See Pulmonary valve insufficiency 3881 Pulmonary valve regurgitation with paranoia, IV:2563, 2566 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2767–2768 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 schizoaffective disorder, IV:2956–2958 with substance abuse, IV:3210 from thyroid crisis, III:1724 Psychotropic agents, I:318 Psyllium for constipation, II:906 for Crohn’s disease, II:959 for diarrhea, II:1067 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 for E. coli infections, II:1237 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for IBS, III:1867 as laxative, III:1964 before stool culture, IV:3172 stool fats and, IV:3173 for weight loss, IV:2377 PT test. See Prothrombin time, test of PTC. See Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography Pteroylglutamic acid. See Folic acid Pterygium, IV:2601–2602, 2602 PTHC. See Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography Ptomaine poisoning. See Food poisoning Ptosis, II:1271, IV: 2771–2772, 2771 amblyopia from, I:141 crutches for, IV:2772 laser eye surgery and, IV:2586 in muscular dystrophy, III:2264 from ocular myopathy, IV:2394 PTSD. See Post-traumatic stress disorder PTU drug-induced hepatitis from, III:1607 Puberty, IV:2772–2773 with congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:884–885 delayed (See Delayed puberty) FSH test for, II:1350 hirsutism in, III:1636 moles during, III:2210 periodontal diseases and, IV:2546 scoliosis in, IV:2970 sex hormone tests for, IV:3012 sex hormones and, III:1738 See also Adolescents Pubic bone, III:2123 Pubic lice. See Phthirus pubis Pudendal block, for childbirth, II:760 Pudendal hernia. See Uterine prolapse Pueraria lobata. See Kudzu Puerperal infection, IV:2773–2775 Puffball. See Dandelion Pukeweed. See Lobelia Pulmonary valve stenosis Pulmonary valve stenosis, II:900, IV:2787–2789, V:3472 balloon valvuloplasty for, I:442 heart valve repair for, III:1550 surgery for, III:1543 in tetralogy of Fallot, V:3268 Pulmonary wedge pressure pulmonary artery catheterization and, IV:2778 Pulmonic valve. See Pulmonary valve Pulp injuries. See Fingertip injuries Pulsatilla. See Windflower Pulse in Apgar testing, I:331 calcium channel blockers and, II:627 in defibrillation, II:1015 in dizziness, II:1095 in hypothermia, III:1754 during physical examination, IV:2593 in sedation, IV:2983, 2984 smoke inhalation and, IV:3102 Pulse generator in electric brain stimulation, II:1146 Pulse oximetry for near drowning, IV:2327 for polysomnography, IV:2669 for sedation, IV:2984 for stridor, IV:3194 Pumice for calluses, II:924 Pump devices for erection disorders with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Punch biopsy, IV:3065 for granuloma inguinale, III:1483 for skin lesion removal, IV:3072 Punch drunk syndrome. See Dementia Punch grafting for acne, I:26 Puncture wounds. See Penetrating wounds Punctures. See Penetrating wounds Pupil eye examination for, II:1263 reaction in death, II:1005 neurologic examination for, IV:2351 slit lamp examination for, II:1263 Pure tone audiometry, I:29 Purgatives. See Laxatives Purging buckthorn. See Buckthorn Purified protein derivitive tests for tuberculosis, V:3407–3408 Purine gout from, III:1476 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1502 metabolism of uric acid tests for, V:3442 uric acid tests and, V:3442 3882 Purinethol. See Mercaptopurine Purkinje’s cells, I:388 Purmycin. See Erythromycin estolate Purple clover. See Red clover Purple coneflower. See Echinacea Purple medick. See Alfalfa Purple sage. See Sage Purpura allergic, I:109–111 with vasculitis, V:3478, 3480 antimalarials and, I:288 from aplastic anemia, I:337 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 cryoglobulin test for, II:961 from dengue fever, II:1028 from endocarditis, II:1183–1184 from hemorrhagic fevers, III:1591, 1592 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 from meningococcemia, III:2158 rash from, IV:2820 from vasculitis, V:3478 Purpura hemorrhagica. See Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura Pursed lip breathing for COPD, II:811 Pus. See Suppuration Push-back technique for velopharyngeal insufficiency, V:3490 Pustular psoriasis, IV:2756 Pustules, IV:3074 from acne, I:226 from folliculitis, II:1351, 1352 from rosacea, IV:2917 Puumala virus. See Hantaviruses Puumula virus, III:1508 PUVA. See Photochemotherapy PVS. See Vegetative state PWS. See Prader-Willi syndrome Pyantel pamoate for parasitic disease, I:273 Pyelography. See Urography Pyelonephritis, IV:2333–2334, IV:2789–2790 acute kidney failure from, I:44 chronic kidney failure from, II:806 with creatinine test, II:949 urinalysis for, V:3445 PYGM gene, III:2236 Pyloric stenosis, II:1110, 1111, IV:2790–2792 Pyloromyotomy, IV:2791 Pyloroplasty, IV:2792–2793 with gastrectomy, III:1399 with ulcer surgery, V:3428 with vagotomy, V:3470 Pylorus with duodenal obstruction, II:1110 narrowing of, IV:2790–2791 in nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 with small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 Pyoderma, skin culture for, IV:3068 Pyogenic arthritis. See Infectious arthritis Pyorrhea. See Periodontitis Pyrantel, for parasitic disease, I:273 Pyrantel pamoate for enterobiasis, II:1208 for hookworm disease, III:1668 for roundworm infections, IV:2924 Pyrazinamide for tuberculosis, I:310, 311, 312, V:3409 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Pyrethrin, for malaria prevention, III:2090 Pyrexia. See Fever Pyridium. See Phenazopyridine Pyridostigmine, for myasthenia gravis, III:2274 Pyridoxal phosphate, for vitamin B6 defciency, V:3513 Pyridoxine, V:3524 with antituberculosis drugs, I:310 for autism, I:420 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 in malnutrition, III:2104 paresthesia from, IV:2365 for PMS, IV:2710 for sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 starvation and, IV:3161 vitamin B6 and, V:3513 vitamin tests and, V:3521 vitamin toxicity from, V:3522 Pyrimethamine bleeding with, I:287 effect on healing, I:287 for malaria, I:286 for toxoplasmosis, V:3349 Pyriostigmine bromide Gulf War syndrome and, III:1495 Pyrogens fever and, II:1317 Pyromania, III:1807–1808 Pyrosis. See Heartburn Pyrroloporphyria. See Acute intermittent porphyria Pyruvate, lactic acid and, III:1944 Pyruvate kinase deficiency, IV:2793–2795 Pyruvic acid, III:1941 Pythagoras, as vegetarian, V:3485 Q Q fever, IV:2797–2798 Qigong, III:2224–2225, 2227, IV:2798–2800 Qiinghaosu, for malaria, III:2090 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 R R-tPA. See Tissue plasminogen activator RA. See Rheumatoid arthritis RAA. See Reflexology Association of America Rabbit fever. See Tularemia Rabbit’s flower. See Foxglove Rabetazole, for stomach ulcers, I:308 Rabies, I:206, 207–208, 498, 499, IV:2801–2803 encephalitis from, II:1178 from wounds, V:3583 Rabies vaccine, V:3465 Race. See Ethnicity Rachitic beads, V:3516 Rachitic rosary. See Rachitic beads Radha, Swami Sivananda, III:1514 Radial keratotomy, III:2299, IV:2803–2806, 2805 Radial neck dissection, IV:2813–2815 Radiance Technique Association International, IV:2849 Radiation acute leukemia from, III:1987 aplastic anemia from, I:337 birth defects from, I:490 from bone x-rays, I:557 breast cancer from, III:1649 cancer from, II:633, IV:2942 from CAT scan, II:875 chronic leukemia from, III:1991 congenital amputation from, II:887 dry mouth from, II:1109 electromagnetic (See Electromagnetic radiation) in gallbladder x-rays, III:1382, 1383 hairy cell leukemia from, III:1501 hypogonadism from, III:1738 hypoparathyroidism from, III:1744 ionizing (See Ionizing radiation) lung cancer from, III:1649, 2044, 2047 multiple myeloma from, III:2239 myelodysplastic syndrome from, III:2279 myelofibrosis from, III:2282, 2283 paralysis from, IV:2491 pulmonary fibrosis from, III:1774 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 salivary gland tumors from, IV:2933 from space travel, I:428 thyroid cancer from, III:1649, V:3306 Radiation burns. See Burns Radiation heat transfer. See Heat treatment Radiation injuries, IV:2806–2810, 2807, IV:2826 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Radiation therapy, IV:2810–2812 for acoustic neuroma, I:30 for acute leukemia, III:1988 adjuvant (See Adjuvant radiotherapy) for adrenal gland cancer, I:60 for AIDS-related cancer, I:80 for anal cancer, I:171 anosmia from, IV:3099 for arteriovenous malformations, I:358 for bladder cancer, I:508 for brain tumor, I:572, 574 for breast cancer, I:582 for cancer, II:635–636, 637 as definitive therapy, II:638–640 as palliative therapy, II:641 cardiac tamponade from, IV:2538 for cervical cancer, II:714, IV:2487 with chemotherapy, II:740 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for colon cancer, II:853 for craniopharyngiomas, IV:2608 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976–977 diarrhea from, II:1066 dry mouth from, II:1110 edema from, II:1135 for endometrial cancer, II:1190–1191 enteral nutrition with, V:3400 for esophageal cancer, II:1241 external, IV:2810–2811 for eye cancer, II:1261 for galactorrhea, III:1376 for gallbladder cancer, III:1380 gallium scan after, III:1383, 1384 with gout drugs, III:1480 for graft vs. host disease, III:1482 for gynecomastia, III:1498 for head and neck cancer, III:1517 hemorrhagic cystitis from, II:992 for histiocytosis X, III:1639 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646–1647 for hydatidiform mole, III:1685 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 immunotherapy after, III:1791 internal, IV:2811 interstitial (See Brachytherapy) for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898, 1899 for keloids, III:1903 for kidney cancer, III:1910 lactose intolerance from, II:649 for laryngeal cancer, III:1953, IV:3124 for liver cancer, III:2021 with lumpectomy, III:2036–2037 for lung cancer, III:2045 lymphedema from, III:2067 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 3883 Radiation therapy QRS, in bundle branch block, I:614 Quaaludes. See Methaqualone Quadrantectomy. See Lumpectomy Quadriplegia, IV:2491, 3129 Quaker bonnet. See Skullcap Quaker rouge. See Mullein Quality of life with generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 with lung transplantation, III:2056 pain management for, IV:2461, 2464 with terminal illness, II:1006 Quantitative computed tomography. See Computed tomography scan Quantitative reasoning, IV:3153 Quazepam, for insomnia, I:282 Quercetin for allergies, I:121 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for cluster headache, II:825 Questran. See Cholestyramine Quetiapine, for psychosis, I:300, 301, 302, 303 Quick-Pep. See Caffeine Quinaglute Dura-Tabs. See Quinidine Quinagulate. See Quinidine Quinapril, for hypertension, I:203, 279–281 Quinidex. See Quinidine sulfate Quinidine with antimalarials, I:288 for anxiety, I:233 for arrhythmias, I:353 autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 with caffeine, II:626 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 G6PD and, III:1465 for heart arrhythmia, I:233 for heart attacks, III:1534 pleurisy from, IV:2631 serum sickness from, IV:3008 Quinidine sulfate, cholestasis from, II:784 Quinine allergic purpura from, I:110 for babesiosis, I:433 deafness from, III:1528 G6PD and, III:1465 hearing loss from, III:1528 jaundice from, III:1881 for malaria, I:286, III:2090 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 resistance to, III:2090 Quinolones as antibiotic, I:241 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 for Q fever, IV:2797 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 Quinora. See Quinidine Radiation therapy with lymphography, III:2066 for lymphomas, III:2094 lymphopenia from, III:2068 for macular degeneration, III:2076 malabsorption syndromes from, III:2086 malnutrition with, III:2104 for MALT lymphomas, III:2108 with mastectomy, III:2128, 2130 for melanoma, III:2099 MMR vaccine with, III:2256 for multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2237 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for myelofibrosis, III:2283 myocarditis from, III:2289 for neuroblastoma, IV:2341–2342 neutropenia from, IV:2353 non-melanoma skin cancer and, IV:3066–3067 ovarian cancer and, IV:2442–2443 for Paget’s disease of the breast, III:2158 with pancreatectomy, IV:2469 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2470, 2476 for penile cancer, IV:2530 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2579 for pituitary adenoma, I:34 for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 premature menopause from, IV:2702 for prostate cancer, IV:2733 for rectal cancer, IV:2831 for retinoblastoma, IV:2886 salivary gland tumors from, IV:2933 for sarcomas, IV:2944, 2945 for small cell lung cancer, III:2049 for spinal cord tumors, IV:3133 with staphylococcal infections, IV:3156 stereotactic, I:30 for stomach cancer, IV:3165, 3167 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for testicular cancer, V:3258–3259 for thymoma, V:3302–3303 for thyroid cancer, V:3307–3308 tumor removal with, V:3415 with vaccines, V:3469 for vulvar cancer, V:3537–3538 for Wilm’s tumor, V:3565–3566 See also Brachytherapy Radiation treatment. See Radiation therapy Radical cystectomy. See Cystectomy Radical hysterectomy. See Hysterectomy Radical inguinal orchiectomy, V:3258 Radical mastectomy, III:2128–2129 Radical neck dissection, IV:2813–2815, 2813, 2814 Radical nephrectomy. See Nephrectomy Radical prostatectomy. See Prostatectomy Radiculopathy 3884 cervical (See Cervical radiculopathy) electromyography for, II:1160 paresthesia from, IV:2365 Radio-allergosorbent allergy test, I:117–118, 122–124, 179 Radio waves, III:2082, 2083 Radioactive chromium, IV:3139 Radioactive drugs. See Radiopharmaceuticals Radioactive implants. See Brachytherapy Radioactive iodine, IV:3139 with adrenal gland scan, I:61 for goiter testing, III:1471 for hyperthyroidism, III:1725 hypothyroidism from, III:1756 uptake scan, V:3314 Radioactive isotopes radiation and, IV:2807 for technetium heart scan, V:3246 Radioactive markers. See Radiopharmaceuticals Radioactive pellets, IV:2608 Radioactive phosphorus32, IV:2659 Radioenhancers, I:572 Radiofrequency ablation, IV:3112 Radiofrequency catheter ablation. See Catheter ablation Radiofrequency energy, II:679–680 Radioimmunoassay for hepatitis D, III:1611 for hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 for hyperthyroidism, III:1724 PSA test as, IV:2735 Radioimmunotherapy, IV:2811 Radioisotopes. See Radiopharmaceuticals Radioisotopic scan, III:1389 Radiologic imaging test, II:973 Radionuclide blood pool. See Liver scan Radionuclide brain scintigraphy, I:571 Radionuclide imaging with adrenalectomy, I:63 for atherosclerosis, I:394, 395 bone for sarcomas, IV:2943 with bone nuclear medicine scan, I:555 brain (See Radionuclide brain scintigraphy) with cancer therapy, II:640 for coronary heart disease, II:930 for esophageal function, II:1242, 1243 for gallbladder vs. gallbladder x-ray, III:1382 for heart valve repair, III:1550 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645 for indigestion, III:1813 vs. intravenous urography, III:1854 for jaundice, III:1883 kidney, III:1914–1916 of the liver, III:2027–2028 with liver biopsy, III:2017 of the lungs, III:2051–2052 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 for osteomyelitis, IV:2420 for paresthesia, IV:2365 for polycythemia vera, IV:2659 for secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 for splenic trauma, IV:3141 for testicular torsion, V:3263 for whiplash, V:3555 Radionuclide retrograde cystography, IV:2892–2893 Radionuclide scan. See Radionuclide imaging Radionuclide venography, II:1013 Radionuclide ventilation lung scan. See Lung ventilation scan Radionuclide ventriculography, III:1539 Radionuclide volume study. See Liver scan Radiopharmaceuticals acute kidney failure from, I:44, 46 with breastfeeding, III:1943 with kidney scans, III:1915 with liver biopsy, III:2017 for lung imaging, III:2052 for parathyroid scans, IV:2496 salivary gland scan and, IV:2932 See also Radiation therapy Radioprotective drugs, I:572 Radiosensitizers, I:572 Radiosurgery for arteriovenous malformations, IV:3203 for brain tumor, I:572 in hypophysectomy, III:1745 for psychosurgery, IV:2770 Radiotherapy. See Radiation therapy Radon, III:2044, 2046, 2047, 2049 Ragweed allergic rhinitis from, I:111 asthma from, I:380 Railway nystagmus. See Optokinetic nystagmus RAIU. See Radioactive iodine, uptake scan Raja yoga, V:3595 See also Yoga Raloxifene, I:542–543, 543, 544 vs. hormone replacement therapy, III:2162 for menopause, III:2163, IV:2998 for osteoporosis, IV:2998 Ramipril for heart attacks, III:1534 for hypertension, I:203 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 from ondansetron, II:644 from physical allergy, IV:2592 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 from RMSF, IV:2910 in roseola, IV:2919, 2920 from serum sickness, IV:3007, 3008 from sildenafil citrate, IV:3054 from smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 from SSRIs, IV:2992 from syphilis, IV:3227 tests for, I:123 Raspberry tongue, IV:2952 RAST. See Radio-allergosorbent allergy test Rat-bite fever, IV:2821–2823 Rational-emotive behavior therapy, II:841–842 Rats. See Rodents Rattletop. See Black cohosh Raynaud’s disease, IV:2823–2825, 2823 vs. acrocyanosis, I:32 amputation from, I:157 antinuclear antibody test for, I:294 biofeedback for, I:482 blood-viscosity reducing agents for, I:520 vs. Buerger’s disease, I:611 cryoglobulin test for, II:961 from multiple myeloma, III:2240 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 from scleroderma, IV:2966 Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia and, V:3544 Raynaud’s phenomenon gangrene from, III:1393 from myxoma, III:2306 Raynaud’s syndrome. See Raynaud’s disease RB1 gene, IV:2883, 2884–2885, 2888 RCDP. See Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata RDA. See Recommended dietary allowance RDS. See Respiratory distress syndrome RDW. See Red cell distribution width Reactive arthritis. See Reiter’s syndrome Reactive disorders. See Adjustment disorders Reactive hypoglycemia. See Hypoglycemia Read method, II:761 Reading disorder. See Dyslexia Realignment. See Fracture repair Reasoning in conduct disorder, II:883 with inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Stanford-Binet intelligence scale, IV:3153–3154 Rebound congestion, II:1011 Rebound effect, V:3573 Rebound headache, III:2188 Receptive aphasia. See Wernicke’s aphasia beta Receptor agonists, I:381, 383 Receptor-mediated permeabilizers, I:573 Recessive inheritance in ataxia-telangiectasia, I:388 in birth defects, I:491 in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, II:734–735 in chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 cutis laxa as, II:978 in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, II:1140 in Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 in lipoidosis, III:2004 in muscular dystrophy, III:2263 in peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 in polycystic kidney disease, IV:2652 in SCID, IV:3009 in Tay-Sachs disease, III:2004 in Wilson disease, V:3567 in Wolman’s disease from, III:2004–2005 Recharge. See Oral rehydration solutions Recklinghausen’s disease. See Neurofibromatosis Recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator. See Tissue plasminogen activator Recommended dietary allowance, II:1347 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1700 for iron, III:1860–1861 for minerals, III:2190–2193, 2196 for riboflavin, IV:2906 for thiamine, I:471 for vitamin A, V:3512 for vitamin B6, V:3465 for vitamin C, IV:2978 for vitamin D, V:3515–3516, 3517 for vitamin E, V:3518 for vitamin K, V:3519 vitamin toxicity and, V:3522 Recompression treatment, IV:2826–2827 for decompression sickness, II:1010 for gas embolism, III:1396 See also Hyperbaric oxygenation Reconstructive surgery. See Plastic surgery Recreational drugs. See Street drugs Rectal biopsy. See Colon, biopsy of Rectal bleeding. See Melena Rectal cancer, II:631, 632, 634, IV:2827–2832, 2829 anoscopy for, I:214 3885 Rectal cancer Ramsthorn. See Buckthorn Range of motion in cardiac rehabilitation, II:659 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 in dislocations and subluxations, II:1083 in Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1370 of joints arthroplasty for, I:362 for contracture, II:913–914 for infectious arthritis, III:1821 in osteoarthritis, IV:2412 with scoliosis, IV:2972 for spasticity, IV:3131 with spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 Range of motion exercises, II:1249–1251 for contracture, II:914 after orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 during traction, V:3357 Ranitidine cholestasis from, II:784 with cisapride, I:273 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 for hiatal hernias, III:1624 for indigestion, III:1814 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for stomach ulcers, I:308 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 Ranson’s signs, IV:2481 Ranunculus, for shingles, IV:3032 RAO. See Retinal artery occlusion Rapamune. See Sirolimus Rapamycin. See Sirolimus Rape, I:16–17, IV:2816–2820, 2818, 2819t PTSD from, IV:2685 substance abuse and, IV:3206 Rape trauma syndrome. See Post-traumatic stress disorder Rapid cycling, I:486 Rapid opiate detoxification, V:3574 Rapid plasma reagin test, IV:3229 Rapid strep test for strep throat, IV:3178 vs. throat cultures, V:3294 Rapture of the deep. See Inert gas narcosis Rash, II:1328, IV:2820–2821, 2820 from antiretroviral drugs, I:304 from antituberculosis drugs, I:312 from atopic dermatitis, I:403 from breastfeeding, III:1943 from calcium channel blockers, II:628 from contact dermititis, II:910 from decompression sickness, II:1010 diaper (See Diaper rash) from enteroviruses, II:1212 from fluoroquinolones, II:1346 incontinence (See Incontinence rash) Rectal cancer barium enema for, I:447 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:653 carcinoid tumors and, IV:2343 constipation from, II:906 digital rectal examination for, IV:2833 endorectal ultrasonography for, II:1195, 1196 liver cancer from, III:2019 from rectal polyps, IV:2834, 2835 sigmoidoscopy for, I:562, IV:3049–3051 Rectal diseases bowel preparation for, I:562–563 enterostomy for, II:1209 lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2071 Rectal examination, IV:2833–2834 by anoscopy, I:214–215 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 for bladder stones, I:510 for cancer, II:634 for coccyx injuries, II:837 digital (See Digital rectal examination) with FOBT, II:1302 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 Rectal polyps, IV:2834–2835 anoscopy for, I:214 familial polyposis and, II:1285 Rectal prolapse, IV:2835–2836 anoscopy for, I:214 from E. coli, II:1236 with fecal incontinence, II:1300–1301 Rectal surgery rectal prolapse from, IV:2835 sitz bath for, IV:3061 Rectal temperature. See Body temperature Rectal tube, III:1849 Rectal ulcers, IV:2354 Recto-vaginal examination. See Pelvic examination Rectum colonoscopy of, II:856 enemas and, II:1199 physical examination of, IV:2594 Recurrence of alcoholism, I:98 in multiple sclerosis, III:2250 of pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2637 of pneumothorax, IV:2642 after ulcer surgery, V:3428 Recurrent corneal erosion, II:918 Recurrent genital herpes, III:1441, 1442–1443 Recurrent hereditary polyserositis. See Familial Mediterranean fever Recurrent Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647 3886 Recurrent laryngeal nerve, V:3530 Recurrent miscarriage, IV:2836–2837 Recurrent neuroblastoma. See Neuroblastoma Recurrent pyogenic cholangitis, II:774 Recurrent retinoblastoma. See Retinoblastoma Red blood cell count for AIDS, I:84 for anoxia, I:216 with chemotherapy, II:742 for hypersplenism, III:1719 for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 with kidney function tests, III:1912 for mineral deficiencies, III:2196 for nephritis, IV:2334 with red blood cell indices, IV:2838–2839 reticulocyte count and, IV:2874 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 Red blood cell count, low. See Anemia Red blood cell indices, IV:2837–2839 Red blood cells 2,3-DPG in, V:3419 acid phosphatase in, I:23 in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 in anemia, II:915 aspartate aminotransferase in, I:374 Babesia microti in, I:433 in bartonellosis, I:452 blood donation and, I:525, 526 blood transfusions of, V:3368 in chronic kidney failure, II:806 in cyanosis, II:979 destruction of (See Hemolysis) in erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1229 in ESR, II:1230 in falciparum malaria, III:2090 in fifth disease, II:1328 graft vs. host disease and, III:1482 haptoglobin test for, III:1511 hematocrit test for, III:1571–1572 in hematuric proteinuria kidney diseases, III:1775 hemoglobin test for, III:1576–1577 in hemolytic anemia, III:1579 in jaundice, III:1881–1882 lactate dehydrogenase in, III:1939, 1940, 1941 lactic acid and, III:1944 in leukemia stains, III:1985 in lymphomas, III:2092 maturation of, IV:2874 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2280 in neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 in nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 normal ranges for, I:522 in polycythemia vera, IV:2659 in pyruvate kinase deficiency, IV:2795 secondary polycythemia and, IV:2981, 2982 urinalysis for, V:3445 Red cell absolute values. See Red blood cell indices Red cell distribution width, IV:2838, 2839 Red clover for acne, I:26 for menopause, III:2162 for PMS, IV:2711 Red color blindness, II:859 Red elm. See Slippery elm Red ginseng. See Korean ginseng Red/green color blindness. See Color blindness Red marine algae, III:1443 Red migraine. See Cluster headache Red peppers, IV:2377 Red raspberry, III:2172 Redeye. See Conjunctivitis Reduced-size liver transplantation. See Liver transplantation Reducible hernia, III:1625 Reduction mammoplasty. See Breast reduction Reduviidae. See Triatominae Reed-Sternberg cells, III:1644–1645 Referred pain, IV:2460 from cervical spondylosis, II:720 with coccyx injuries, II:836 Reflex incontinence. See Urinary incontinence Reflex neuromuscular dystrophy. See Reflex sympathetic dystrophy Reflex points. See Reflexology Reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2839–2840, IV:3224 Reflex tests, I:331, 438, IV:2350, 2352, IV:2840–2841 Reflexes in lactation, III:1942 in malnutrition, III:2104 Reflexology, I:37, IV:2841–2845, 2843, 2844f for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for brain tumors, I:573 for cancer, II:636 colonic irrigation and, II:855 for folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 for IBS, III:1867 for indigestion, III:1814 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for stress reduction, IV:3189, 3190 Reflexology Association of America, IV:2843, 2844f Reflexotherapy. See Reflexology Refludan. See Lepirudin Reflux esophagitis, I:309 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for bed-wetting, I:455 in group therapy, III:1485 Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2851–2852, 2852 from shigellosis, IV:3028 uveitis from, V:3461 Rejection (Psychology), III:1486 Relafen. See Nabumetone Relapse. See Recurrence Relapsing fever, IV:2852–2854 from lice, III:1995 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 Relapsing polychondritis, III:1904, IV:2854–2855 Relationships in families, II:1287–1288 human potential movement and, III:1677 in Munchausen syndrome, III:2258 Relative polycythemia. See Spurious polycythemia Relaxation response. See Relaxation techniques The Relaxation Response (Benson), V:3594 Relaxation techniques, III:2147 for amenorrhea, III:2172 for anxiety, I:321 art therapy for, I:367 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for bruxism, I:608 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 for childbirth, II:761 for COPD, II:811 for coronary heart disease, II:933 for dermatitis prevention, II:1039 for dizziness, II:1096 for endometriosis, II:1194 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428, 1429 for genital herpes, III:1443 in guided imagery, III:1491 HRT and, III:1673 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 for IBS, III:1867 for insomnia, III:1845 for liver cancer, III:2021 for mood disorders, III:2217 for nausea, IV:2326 for pain, IV:2460 for pain management, IV:2463 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for PTSD, IV:2686 for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2786 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for sarcomas, IV:2945 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for stress, IV:3186 for stress reduction, IV:3189 for stuttering, IV:3199, 3200 therapeutic touch for, V:3281–3283 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for tinnitus, V:3323 yoga for, V:3594 See also Alexander technique; Muscle relaxants Relaxation therapy. See Relaxation techniques Relaxin, for sacroiliac ligaments, IV:2931 Relieving Pain at Home, IV:2842 Religious communities, II:1288 autopsy and, I:425 female genital mutilation and, II:1306, 1307 hairy cell leukemia and, III:1503 pica and, IV:2595–2596 REM sleep, III:1843, IV:2311 in narcolepsy, IV:2311 night terrors and, IV:2355, 2356 in sleep disorders, IV:3086–3087 Remicade. See Infliximab Remodeling, in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 Renal arteriography for renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 for renal artery stenosis, IV:2856 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 Renal artery embolization, III:1911 Renal artery obstruction, IV:2855–2857 hyperaldosteronism from, III:1694–1695 renovascular hypertension and, IV:2860 Renal artery occlusion, IV:2855–2856 Renal artery stenosis, III:1915, IV:2856–2857 Renal ascites. See Ascites Renal biopsy. See Kidney biopsy Renal cell carcinoma, III:1909, IV:2332 See also Kidney cancer Renal corpuscle, in nephrotoxic injury, IV:2336 Renal dialysis. See Hemodialysis Renal failure. See Kidney failure Renal Fanconi’s syndrome. See Fanconi’s syndrome Renal insufficiency. See Kidney failure Renal pelvis with hydronephrosis, III:1689 in medullary sponge kidney, III:2149 Renal scan. See Kidney scan Renal toxicity, I:303 See also Kidney damage Renal tubular acidosis, III:1917, IV:2857–2858, IV:2858 Renal tubule, IV:2336–2337 Renal vein thrombosis, IV:2859 Renal venography, for renal vein thrombosis, IV:2859 Rendu-Osler-Weber disease. See Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia 3887 Rendu-Osler-Weber disease Reflux nephropathy, II:806 Refractive errors eye examination for, II:1263 eyeglasses and contact lenses for, II:1265, 1266 Refractive eye surgery, III:2298–2299 Refractive myopia. See Myopia Refractory anemia, III:2279 Refrigerants delirium from, II:1021 for skin resurfacing, IV:3080 Refsum disease, III:2004, 2005, IV:2560 Regional anesthesia, I:190 for childbirth, II:760 vs. local anesthesia, I:190 Regional enteritis. See Crohn’s disease Regixen. See Phendimetrazine Reglan. See Metoclopramide Regression therapy, IV:2761 Regular astigmatism. See Astigmatism Regurgitation aortic (See Aortic valve insufficiency) echocardiography for, II:1129 mitral (See Mitral valve insufficiency) pulmonary (See Pulmonary valve insufficiency) transesophageal echocardiography for, V:3365 tricuspid (See Tricuspid valve insufficiency) Rehabilitation, IV:2845–2848, 2846 for alcoholism, I:98 Alexander technique in, I:104 art therapy in, I:367 for COPD, II:811 exercise for, II:1249–1251 for head injuries, III:1522 music therapy for, III:2270 after orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 after pelvic fracture, IV:2520 for post-concussion syndrome, IV:2679 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 Rehmannia glutinosa. See Chinese foxglove Rehydration. See Fluid therapy Reiki, IV:2848–2851 for AIDS, I:81 for indigestion, III:1814 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for process addictions, I:52 Reiki: Energy Medicine, IV:2850 Reiki Alliance, IV:2849 Reimann periodic disease. See Familial Mediterranean fever Reimann’s syndrome. See Familial Mediterranean fever Reinforcement (Psychology) Renese Renese. See Polythiazide Renin, in renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 Renin stimulation test, IV:2617–2618 Renova. See Tretinoin Renovascular hypertension, IV:2859–2861 captopril test for, IV:2618 from renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 from renal artery stenosis, IV:2856 Repaglininde, for diabetes, I:262 Repeated Test of Sustained Wakefulness, IV:3091 Repeated transcranial magnetic stimulation, I:488 Repetition strain injury Alexander technique for, I:104 bursitis from, I:620 carpal tunnel sydrome as, II:667–669 costochondritis from, II:940, 941 paresthesia from, IV:2365, 2366 rotator cuff injury as, IV:2920, 2921 from sports, IV:3144 tennis elbow as, V:3252 Repetitive motion injuries. See Repetition strain injury Repression, III:2244 Reproduction. See Infertility Reproductive function cystic fibrosis, II:984–985, 987–988 Klinefelter syndrome and, III:1926, 1927 Reproductive systems choriocarcinomas of, II:796–797 gonorrhea and, III:1472, 1473 male, III:2167 physical examination of, IV:2593–2594 See also Infertility Repronex. See Menotropins Requip. See Ropinirole Rescriptor. See Delavirdine Rescue breathing. See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Resection abdominoperineal (See Abdominoperineal resection) for cancer, II:639 local (See Local resection) See also Lobectomy; Surgery Reserpine gastric acid determination and, III:1400 as migraine trigger, III:2188 triiodothyronine levels and, V:3312 Residual schizophrenia, IV:2959 Resistant Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647 Resorbable polymeric grafts, I:544 Resorcinol, for acne, I:25 Resorcinol sulfar, I:227 Resorption, IV:2455 3888 Resperidone for psychosis, I:300 for tardive dyskinesia, V:3243 Resperine, IV:3099 Respiration Apgar testing for, I:331 artificial (See Mechanical ventilation) chest physical therapy for, II:745 in dizziness, II:1095 in sedation, IV:2983, 2984 in septic shock, IV:3005 Respirators. See Ventilators Respiratory acidosis, IV:2861–2862 Respiratory alkalosis, II:1105, IV:2862–2863 Respiratory arrest. See Respiratory insufficiency Respiratory diseases. See Respiratory tract diseases Respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2863–2865 adult (See Adult respiratory distress syndrome) aromatherapy for, I:349 from congenital lobar emphysema, II:893 ECMO for, II:1256 inhalation therapies for, III:1837, 1838 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 from prematurity, IV:2706 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2865 Respiratory failure. See Respiratory insufficiency Respiratory function chest physical therapy for, II:745 with emphysema, II:1172–1174 hemoglobin and, III:1576 with interstitial lung diseases, III:1773–1774 with nasal packing, IV:2314 with near drowning, IV:2327 in premature infants, III:2247–2248 with radiation therapy, III:2130 surgery for, III:2053–2054 traction and, V:3358 Respiratory function tests, IV:2783–2784, 2784 for anthrax, I:224–225 for asbestosis, I:370 for aspergillosis, I:376 for black lung disease, I:506 for bronchitis, I:599 for COPD, II:810 for cor pulmonale, II:917 for emphysema, II:1173 for extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1717 with inhalation therapies, III:1839 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 for lung diseases, III:2051 for nasal trauma, IV:2318 for occupational asthma, IV:2387 for pulmonary fibrosis, IV:2782 for pulmonary hypertension, IV:2785 for sarcoidosis, IV:2941 for silicosis, IV:3055 for smoke inhalation, IV:3102 for stridor, IV:3194 before thoracic surgery, V:3288 for wheezing, V:3554 Respiratory insufficiency, IV:2865–2867 from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, IV:3124 blood gas analysis for, I:527 bronchoscopy for, I:603 from chronic bronchitis, II:809 from cocaine, II:832 CPR for, II:661–662 from drug overdose, II:1104, 1106 ECMO for, II:1256 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 from emphysema, II:809 from extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1717 from glycogen storage diseases, III:1466 from hypernatremia, III:1710 inhalation therapies for, III:1837–1841 from occupational asthma, IV:2386 in PAP, IV:2776 from pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 respiratory acidosis and, IV:2861 from septic shock, IV:3005 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 from silicosis, IV:3055 from thoracic surgery, V:3289 from ventricular assist devices, V:3498 Respiratory muscles amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and, I:165 Respiratory protective devices for lung disease prevention, III:2051 for multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 for nasal trauma, IV:2319 Respiratory syncytial virus, IV:2867–2869 laryngitis from, III:1957 ribavirin for, I:315, 316 Respiratory system, IV:2637–2638 Respiratory therapy aromatherapy in, I:348 for botulism, I:561 for children, II:764 for COPD, II:811 for Guillain-Barré syndrome, III:1493 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 cardiopulmonary (See Cardiopulmonary resuscitation) RET gene cancer susceptibility testing and, III:1436–1437 in Hirschsprung’s disease, III:1635 in multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236, 2237 in pheochromocytoma, IV:2578 Retevase. See Tissue plasminogen activator Retic count. See Reticulocyte count Reticular activating system, II:866, V:3489 Reticulocyte count, IV:2874–2875 Reticulocyte index. See Reticulocyte count Reticulocytes, IV:2874–2875 Reticuloendothelial system, III:1939 Retin-A. See Tretinoin Retina angiography for, I:197, 198 in astigmatism, I:384 cancer of (See Retinoblastoma) in cataracts, II:671 detached (See Retinal detachment) examination and ophthalmoscopy for, II:1265 eye muscle surgery and, II:1270 in glaucoma, III:1457–1458 from hemorrhagic fevers, III:1592 in macular degeneration, III:2075–2076 in Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004 in refractive errors, II:1266 in shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 Retinal artery occlusion, IV:2875–2876, IV:2890 Retinal choroidal hole, IV:2879 Retinal degeneration. See Macular degeneration Retinal detachment, IV:2876–2878, 2877f from cataract surgery, II:672, 675 from eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2692 with macular degeneration, III:2077 from Marfan syndrome, III:2115 ophthalmoscopy for, II:1263 ultrasonography for, II:1258 vitrectomy for, V:3528 Retinal diseases. See Retinopathy Retinal dysplasia, II:892 Retinal epithelium, III:2075 Retinal perforations, II:1265 Retinal vein occlusion, IV:2878–2880, IV:2890 Retinitis, II:1000, 1258 Retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2880–2882, 2881 color blindness from, II:860 optic atrophy from, IV:2399 from Refsum disease, III:2004 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Retinoblastoma, II:1260–1261, IV:2882–2889, 2885 bilateral, IV:2886 bone cancer with, IV:2942 unilateral, IV:2886 Retinochoroiditis, V:3349 Retinoic acid. See Tretinoin Retinoids for cancer, II:637 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for rosacea, IV:2918 with ultraviolet light treatment, V:3436 Retinol. See Vitamin A Retinopathy, IV:2889–2892, 2889, 2891 diabetic (See Diabetic retinopathy) of prematurity, IV:2707 from sickle cell disease, IV:3044, 3045 in sickle cell disease, IV:3044 Retinoscopy for anisometropia, I:142 for eye examination, II:1263 for hyperopia, III:1712 Retinyl acetate, V:3512 Retinyl palmitate, V:3512 Retrobulbar hematoma, I:519 Retrocaval ureter, II:895 Retrocollis, V:3340 Retrograde amnesia, I:152 from head injuries, III:1520 from Korsakoff’s syndrome, I:92 Retrograde cystography, IV:2892–2893 Retrograde degeneration, IV:2551 Retrograde ejaculation, IV:3015, 3016 Retrograde pyelography with cystoscopy, II:996 vs. intravenous urography, III:1854 Retrograde ureteropyelography, IV:2893–2894 Retrograde urethrography, IV:2894–2895 Retrolental fibroplasia. See Retinopathy, of prematurity Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, V:3258 Retropharyngeal abscess. See Throat abscess Retropubic suspension. See MarshallMarchetti-Krantz procedure Retrovir. See Zidovudine Retroviral infection tests, I:82 Retrovirus infections in chronic leukemia, III:1991 drugs for, I:303–304 with lymphomas, III:2093 Retroviruses, III:1419–1420 Rett’s syndrome, IV:2568–2569 Revascularization, IV:2857 3889 Revascularization for lung diseases, III:2051 lung transplantation for, III:2054 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for occupational asthma, IV:2387 for premature infants, III:2248, 2249 for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 Respiratory tract cystic fibrosis, II:985–989 in scleroderma, IV:2967 Respiratory tract diseases from adenoviruses, I:56, 57 with benzodiazepines, I:232 with congenital heart diseases, II:900 conjunctivitis from, II:902 cor pulmonale from, II:917 vs. cryptococcosis, II:964 emphysema, II:1172–1175 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2320–2321 otitis media with, IV:2433 from Patau syndrome, IV:2510 penicillin for, IV:2527 pleurisy from, IV:2631 See also Common cold Respiratory tract infections from adenoviruses, I:56–57 anosmia from, IV:3099, 3100 from asbestosis, I:370 from asthma, I:380 from ataxia-telangiectasia, I:388 from bronchiectasis, I:596 cough from, II:941 erythema nodosum from, II:1227 facial paralysis from, I:461 fungal, II:1227 from glomerulonephritis, III:1462–1463 hemophilus infections, III:1586 with juvenile arthritis, III:1905 laryngitis from, III:1957, 1958 meningitis from, III:2154 from mycoplasma, III:2278 pleurisy from, IV:2631 sputum culture for, IV:3149–3151 with stridor, IV:3193 wheezing from, V:3554 See also Respiratory syncytial virus; Tonsillitis Rest, ice, compression & elevation. See RICE Restenosis, II:934, 935 Restless legs syndrome, III:2221, IV:2869–2872, IV:2997 Reston, James, I:37, 40 Restorative proctocolectomy, II:1286 Restoril. See Temazepam Restraints. See Physical restraint Restrictive cardiomyopathy, IV:2872–2873 Resuscitation Reverse SAD Reverse SAD. See Seasonal affective disorder Reverse seasonal affective disorder. See Seasonal affective disorder Reverse transcriptase inhibitors, nonnucleoside. See Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction test. See Polymerase chain reaction test ReVia. See Naltrexone Revised Ann Arbor System. See Ann Arbor Staging Classification Rewarming. See Heat treatment Reye’s syndrome, IV:2895–2896 aspirin and, I:378, II:1329 from bismuth subsalicylate, I:265 with chickenpox, II:750, 751 fatty liver from, II:1298 with infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 from influenza, III:1834 liver function tests for, III:2025, 2027 with measles, III:2140 RF. See Rheumatic fever Rh factor CVS with, II:799, 801 erythroblastosis fetalis from, II:1228 Rh incompatibility disease. See Rh isoimmunization Rh isoimmunization, II:1230 autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 cesarean section with, II:726 high-risk pregnancy and, III:1632 induced labor with, III:1816 jaundice from, III:1883 Rh typing, I:532–533 for blood donation, I:525 for blood transfusions, V:3368 Rhabdoviridae meningitis from, III:2154 rabies from, IV:2801 Rhamnus. See Buckthorn Rhamnus purshianna. See Buckthorn Rheotherapy, III:2077 Rheumatic diseases antinuclear antibody test for, I:294–295 aspirin for, I:378 with dermatomyositis, III:2294 fibromyalgia and, II:1327 vs. polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2666 See also Temporal arteritis Rheumatic fever, IV:2897–2899, IV:2898 antimyocardial antibody test for, I:291 aortic valve insufficiency from, I:328 aortic valve stenosis from, I:329 3890 bundle branch block from, I:614 endocarditis from, II:1183 heart valve diseases from, V:3472, 3474 infectious arthritis with, III:1820 mitral valve insufficiency from, III:2206, 2207 mitral valve stenosis from, III:2209, 2210 myocarditis from, III:2289 from scarlet fever, IV:2951 strep throat and, IV:3178, 3179 streptococcal antibody tests for, IV:3180, 3181, 3182 Sydenham’s chorea with, IV:3223 from tonsillitis, V:3328 tricuspid valve stenosis from, V:3390 Rheumatic gout. See Rheumatoid arthritis Rheumatic heart disease heart valve damage from, III:1549 mitral valve prolapse from, III:2207 Sydenham’s chorea with, IV:3223 Rheumatism. See Rheumatic diseases Rheumatoid arthritis, I:422–425, IV:2899–2903, IV:3224 with amyloidosis, I:161 antinuclear antibody test for, I:294–295 arthroplasty for, I:361 from autoimmune response, II:915 ayurvedic medicine for, I:432 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 bursitis from, I:620 from common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 with corneal ulcers, II:922 cryoglobulin test for, II:961, 962 drugs for (See Antirheumatic drugs) ESR and, II:1231 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 vs. fibromyalgia, II:1326 with fifth disease, II:1328 haptoglobin test and, III:1511 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 hypersplenism from, III:1718 in hypothyroidism, III:1756 immune complex test for, III:1783 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795, 1796 joint replacement for, III:1890 juvenile (See Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis) vs. juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, III:1893 with keratitis, III:1904 with lymphomas, III:2093 neutropenia from, IV:2354 paralysis from, IV:2491 pericarditis from, IV:2538 pleural effusion from, IV:2628, 2629 pleurisy from, IV:2631 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 vs. psoriasis, IV:2756 vs. psoriatic arthritis, IV:2758 radial keratotomy and, IV:2804 from Raynaud disease, IV:2823 with relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 sideroblastic anemia with, IV:3048 with silicosis, IV:3055 Sjögren’s syndrome with, IV:3063 dry mouth from, II:1109 from strep throat, IV:3120 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1890 with vasculitis, V:3479 Rheumatoid diseases, II:1231 Rheumatoid factor with juvenile arthritis, III:1893 with rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901, 2902 Rheumatoid nodules, IV:2899, 2900, 2902 Rheumatoid spondylitis. See Ankylosing spondylitis Rheumatrex. See Methotrexate Rhinitis, IV:2903–2904 allergic (See Allergic rhinitis) anosmia and, I:215, IV:3099 with aspirin, I:379 from nasal trauma, IV:2317 See also Common cold Rhinitis medicamentosa, IV:2316 Rhinocerebral mucormycosis. See Mucormycosis Rhinophyma. See Rosacea Rhinoplasty, IV:2621, IV:2904–2905 nasal irrigation for, IV:2312 nasal packing for, IV:2314 for nasal papillomas, IV:2315 nasal trauma and, IV:2317, 2318 perforated septum from, IV:2535 with septoplasty, IV:3006 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 Rhinovirus infections. See Common cold Rhinoviruses. See Common cold Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, IV:2560 Rhizomucor, III:2232 Rhizopus, III:2232 Rhodesian trypanosomiasis. See African trypanosomiasis Rhododendron, IV:2644 Rhubarb, IV:2643, 2644 Rhus toxicodendron. See Poison ivy; Toxicodendron Rhyne, Janie, I:368 Rhytidoplasty. See Face lift Rib injuries breathing capacity and, III:1999 chest x-ray for, II:749 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for hemophilus infections, III:1588 with HRT, III:1670 kidney damage from, IV:2337 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 for leprosy, III:1979 for meningococcemia prevention, III:2158 for mycetoma, III:2275 with opioid analgesics, I:178 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 parathyroid hormone test and, IV:2495 for Q fever, IV:2797 for tuberculosis, I:310, 311, 312, 313, V:3409 urinalysis and, V:3443 Rift valley fever, III:1592 Rigid gas permeable lenses. See Contact lenses Rigidity, III:2222 from hypothermia, III:1754 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 Rigor mortis, III:2260 Rilutek. See Riluzole Riluzole, I:165 Rimactane. See Rifampin Rimantadine, I:315, III:1835 Rimless frames. See eyeglass frames Ringing ears. See Tinnitus Ringing sounds. See Sounds Ringworm. See Tinea Rinne test for tinnitus, V:3323 with tuning forks, III:1531 Ripplegrass. See Plantain Risedronate, IV:2456, 2457 Risk taking behavior in drowning and near drowning, IV:2326–2327 in mania, III:2112 Risperidone for bipolar disorder, I:488 for delusions, II:1023 for dementia, II:1026 for hallucinations, III:1504 for paranoia, IV:2493 for psychosis, IV:2766 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 Ristocetin-induced platelet aggregation, V:3533 Ritalin. See Methylphenidate Ritodrine, for premature labor, IV:2701 Ritonavir for AIDS, I:80 drug interactions with, II:1102, 1103 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 as protease inhibitors, IV:2742 for retrovirus diseases, I:303 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 Rituximab, I:102 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Rivastigmine, for Alzheimer’s disease, I:138, IV:3000 River blindness. See Ocular onchocerciasis River horsetail. See Horsetail Rivotril. See Clonazepam Rizatriptan for migraines, I:289, 290, 291, III:2188 RK. See Radial keratotomy RLS. See Restless legs syndrome RMI. See Rolfing, movement integration in RMSF. See Rocky Mountain spotted fever RNA DNA conversion, IV:2359 Robaxin. See Methocarbamol Robbery, IV:2685 Robbins, Anthony, IV:2349 Robinul. See Glycopyrrolate Robitussin. See Dextromethorphan; Guaifenesin Rocephin. See Ceftriaxone Rochalimaeaquintana. See Bartonella quintana Rock music, hearing loss from, III:1528 Rock-poppy, II:817 Rocky Mountain spotted fever, IV:2910–2912 vs. Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 rash from, IV:2820 tetracyclines for, V:3266 Rodents control of (See Animal control) hantaviruses from, III:1508 LCM from, III:2069 leishmaniasis from, III:1977 leptospirosis from, III:1981 plague and, IV:2614–2616 rat-bite fever from, IV:2822 scrub typhus from, IV:2975 Rods (Eyes), V:3512 Roentgen, Wilhelm Conrad, IV:2807 Rofecoxib for pain, I:174 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Roferon. See Interferon alpha 2a Roferon-A. See Interferon-alpha Rogaine. See Minoxidil Rogers, Carl, III:1676 Rolaids. See Antacids Role playing, III:1446 Rolf, Ida, I:387, III:1569, IV:2912–2913 Rolf-Aston Structural Patterning, I:387 Rolf Institute of Structural Integration, IV:2913 Rolf therapy. See Rolfing Rolfing, IV:2912–2914 vs. Aston-patterning, I:386, 387 for bruxism, I:609 3891 Rolfing chostochondritis from, II:940 from CPR, II:664–665 pleurisy from, IV:2631 pneumothorax from, IV:2641 Rib resection, II:1177 Rib surgery, V:3287 Ribavirin for hantaviruses, III:1508 for hepatitis C, III:1604 for lassa fever, III:1592 for RSV, IV:2869 for viral infections, I:315, 316 Ribgrass. See Plantain Riboflavin, V:3524 for riboflavin deficiency, IV:2906 vitamin tests and, V:3521 Riboflavin deficiency, IV:2906–2907, IV:3161 Ribovarin, II:1179 Ribs costochondritis of, II:940–941 fractured atelectasis from, I:390 with chest physical therapy, II:746 from Heimlich maneuver, III:1565 Ribwort. See Plantain RICE for sports injuries, IV:3146 for tendinitis, V:3251 Rice-Lyte. See Oral rehydration solutions Rickets alkaline phosphatase and, I:106 vs. Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 fractures from, II:1363 from vitamin D deficiency, V:3515, 3516, 3517, 3524 vitamin D-resistant (See Vitamin Dresistant rickets) x-rays for, I:557 Rickettsia, I:241 Rickettsia akara, IV:2907 Rickettsia prowazekii, V:3423 Rickettsia rickettsii, IV:2910 Rickettsia tsutsugamushi, IV:2975, IV:2976, V:3423 Rickettsia typhi, V:3423 Rickettsialpox, IV:2907–2908 Ridaura. See Auranofin Rifabutin for mycobacterial infections, III:2277 for tuberculosis, I:310, 311, 312, 313 Rifadin. See Rifampin Rifampin with atypical antipsychotic agents, I:303 for cholestasis, II:785 for furunculosis, I:537 Rolfing for bunions, I:616 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 Hellerwork and, III:1569, 1570–1571 movement integration in, IV:2913 movement therapy and, III:2225 rhythms, IV:2913 for scoliosis, IV:2972 for stress reduction, IV:3189, 3190 Rolfing: The Integration of Human Structures, IV:2912, 2913 Rolled oats, II:751 Roman chamomile, I:349 Roman nettle. See Nettle Romano-Ward syndrome, IV:2724 Rome criteria, III:1866 Room temperature, SIDS and, IV:3214 Root canal therapy, IV:2914–2916, 2915f for dental trauma, II:1030 for toothache, V:3337 Ropinirole, for Parkinson disease, I:296, 297 Rorschach inkblot test, IV:2764 vs. Holtzman inkblot test, III:1655 for personality disorders, IV:2565 Rosa, Emily, V:3283 Rosacea, IV:2916–2919, 2918 blepharitis from, II:1272 skin resurfacing for, IV:3079 telangiectasia from, IV:3075 Rosary bead esophagus. See Diffuse esophageal spasm Rose elder. See Cramp bark Rose spots, IV:2499 Rosemarinus officinalis. See Rosemary Rosemary for Alzheimer’s disease, I:140 in aromatherapy, I:349 for chickenpox, II:751 for cluster headache, II:825 for constipation, II:907 for emphysema, II:1175 for IBS, III:1867 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 Roseola, IV:2919–2920, 2919 Roses for insomnia, III:1845 sporotrichosis from, IV:3143, 3144 Rosiglitazone, for diabetes, I:262, 263 Rosmarinus officinalis. See Rosemary Ross procedure, II:902, III:1543 Rossman, Martin L., III:1491 Rotation, I:465 Rotational atherectomy, I:392 Rotationoplasty, IV:2944 Rotator cuff arthrography for, I:360–361 arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 injuries (See Rotator cuff injury) MRI for, III:2082 Rotator cuff injury, IV:2920–2921 3892 Rotator cuff tear. See Rotator cuff injury Rotaviruses, IV:2922–2923, 2923 gastroenteritis from, III:1408 travelers diarrhea from, V:3379 Roth, Gabrielle, III:2225 Round-leafed plantain. See Plantain Roundworm infections, IV:2923–2925 See also Strongyloidiasis Roundworms, II:1330 Roxicet. See Oxycodone-acetaminophen Royal malady. See Variegate porphyria RSD. See Reflex sympathetic dystrophy RSV. See Respiratory syncytial virus RU-486. See Mifepristone Rub, IV:2631 Rubber, I:570 Rubber pants, II:1063 Rubbers. See Condoms Rubella, IV:2926–2928, 2926, 2927 antenatal tests for (See Rubella test) birth defects from, I:491 cerebral palsy from, II:702 congenital brain defects from, II:891 congenital heart diseases from, II:899 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 vs. fifth disease, II:1328 hearing loss from, III:1528 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 labyrinthitis from, III:1935–1936 mental retardation from, III:2174 pericarditis from, IV:2538 perinatal, IV:2541–2543 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 stillbirth from, IV:3163 TORCH test for, V:3338 vaccination for, IV:2543, 2927–2928, V:3465 ventricular septal defect from, V:3501 visual impairment from, V:3510 Rubella test, I:219, IV:2927, IV:2928–2929 Rubeola. See Measles Rudbeckia. See Echinacea Ruddes. See Calendula Rueda, III:1965 Rufen. See Ibuprofen Runner’s diarrhea. See Diarrhea Running bunions from, I:615 hyponatremia from, III:1743 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388 Runway malaria. See Malaria Ruptured disk. See Herniated disk Ruptured intervertebral disk. See Herniated disk Ruptured spleen. See Splenic rupture Russell-Silver syndrome, IV:2661 Russell’s sign, I:212 Russian spring-summer encephalitis, I:347 Ruta graveolens for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 Rutin, for glaucoma, III:1461 RVO. See Retinal vein occlusion Rythmol. See Propafenone S SA. See Sensory awareness SAARDs. See Slow-Acting Antirheumatic Drugs Sabin vaccine, IV:2650 Saccharides. See Carbohydrates Saccharomyces boulardii, II:1067 Saccular aneurysm, I:325, 357–358, II:697–700 Sacral region. See Sacrum Sacral vertebrae. See Spine Sacro-occipital technique. See Craniosacral therapy Sacroiliac belt, IV:2931 Sacroiliac disease, IV:2931–2932 Sacroiliac joint, disease of. See Sacroiliac disease Sacrum in coccyx injuries, II:836 with herniated disk, III:1628 in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346–2347 SAD. See Seasonal affective disorder; Sexual aversion disorder Saddle nose in achondroplasia, I:22 from relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 from trauma, IV:2318 Sadism, IV:3018 Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, IV:2661 S.A.F.E., IV:2994 Safes. See Condoms Safety, industrial. See Industrial safety Safety education for children, II:765–766 for dental trauma prevention, II:1030 for drowning prevention, IV:2328 for poisoning prevention, IV:2645 Safety measures. See Security measures Sage, III:1958 for furunculosis, I:538 for sore throats, IV:3120 for strep throat, IV:3179 Sagebrush, I:111 SAH. See Subarachnoid hemorrhage GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from anorexia nervosa, I:212 lipase test for, III:2002 from smelling disorders, IV:3098 Salivary gland obstruction, III:2256 Salivary gland scan, IV:2932–2933 Salivaryglandtumors,IV:2933–2934, 2933f Salivary glands facial injuries and, III:1885 infection of, II:1109 mumps and, III:2255–2256 parotidectomy and, IV:2504 in Sjsyndrome, IV:3063 Salk, Jonas E., IV:2649 Salk vaccine, IV:2650 Salmeterol xinafoate, I:120 Salmon patch. See Nevus simplex Salmonella enterobacterial infections from, II:1204 food poisoning from, II:1353–1354, 1356, IV:2935–2937, 2935 gastroenteritis from, III:1408 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 with loperamide, I:265 osteomyelitis from, IV:2420 Salmonella hirschfeldii, IV:2499 Salmonella paratyphi A, IV:2498–2499 Salmonella paratyphi infection. See Paratyphoid fever Salmonella schottmulleri, IV:2499 Salmonella typhi, V:3421–3422 Salpingectomy, IV:2937–2938 Salpingitis, IV:2522, 2937 Salpingo-oophorectomy, IV:2392, IV:2938–2939 bilateral (See Bilateral salpingooophorectomy) for endometrial cancer, II:1190–1191 Salsify. See Comfrey Salt, table. See Sodium chloride (Dietary) Salt free diet. See Sodium-restricted diet Salt solution. See Saline solution Salt substitutes, I:204, 205 Salt-wasting CAH. See Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Salt water, IV:2757 Salvia. See Sage Salvia officinalis. See Sage Salvia sclarea. See Clary sage Same-day surgery. See Ambulatory surgery Sampson root. See Echinacea San Joaquin fever. See Coccidioidomycosis Sandalwood for dizziness, II:1096 for laryngitis, III:1958 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for sore throats, IV:3119 for strep throat, IV:3179 Sandflies. See Psychodidae Sandimmune. See Cyclosporine Sandostatin. See Octreotide Sanfilippo syndrome, III:2229 Sang Cya. See Cyclosporine Sanitas Food Company, V:3485 Sanitation for cholera, II:782 food poisoning and, II:1354, 1356 gastroenteritis and, III:1408, 1409 poliovirus and, IV:2648 for roundworm infections prevention, IV:2925 for schistosomiasis, IV:2955 Sansert. See Methysergide maleate Saphenous vein, II:926 Saquinavir, IV:2742 for AIDS, I:80 for retrovirus diseases, I:303, 304 Sarcoidosis, IV:2939–2941 ACE test for, I:205 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 diabetes insipidus from, II:1046 gallium scan for, III:1384 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 kidney stones from, III:1917 lung biopsy for, III:2040 lung transplantation for, III:2054 mediastinoscopy for, III:2143, 2145 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 pleurisy from, IV:2631 pulmonary fibrosis from, IV:2782 restrictive cardiomyopathy from, IV:2873 superior vena cava syndrome from, IV:3222 with uveitis, V:3461 Sarcomas, II:632, IV:2941–2945, 2943 esophageal, II:1239 gastric (See Leiomyosarcomas) Kaposi’s (See Kaposi’s sarcoma) kupffer cell, III:2019 leiomyosarcomas gastrectomy for, III:1397 See also Cancer Sarcoptes scabiei. See Mites Sarcoptic acariasis. See Scabies Sargramostim, III:1791 for AIDS, I:80 for bone marrow suppression, II:642, 742 for myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2281 for neutropenia, IV:2354 Sarin. See Nerve gas SASE. See Angiotensin-converting enzyme Satiation in gastric emptying disorders, III:1401 in obesity, IV:2377 3893 Satiation Saiko-keishi-to-shakuyaku, I:140 Saint Anthony’s fire. See Erysipelas Saint John’s wort. See St. John’s wort Saldac. See Sulindac Salicylates aspirin as, I:378 with chickenpox, II:751 with gout drugs, III:1480 hearing loss from, III:1528 overdose, II:1105 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 with tetracyclines, V:3268 with thyroid tests, V:3309 Salicylic acids for acne, I:25 with antiacne agents, I:227 for Crohn’s disease, II:958 in lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for skin growths, II:963 for warts, V:3549 Saline cathartics, III:1963 Saline infusion sonography, IV:2680 Saline solution with abscess drainage, I:16 in allergy tests, I:123 for blood loss, V:3582 in breast implants, I:586, 587 for dacryocystitis, II:1004 with debridement, II:1007, 1008 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 in enemas, II:1200 in gastric lavage, IV:3169 in hysterosonography, III:1768, 1769 for liver biopsy, III:2017 for nasal irrigation, IV:2312 in plasmapheresis, IV:2619 for priapism, IV:2715 for relapsing fever, IV:2853 for sarcoidosis, IV:2941 for sinusitis, IV:3059 in vitrectomy, V:3528 for wound repair, III:1936 Saline sprays for deviated septum, II:1045 for nasal trauma, IV:2318 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 Saliva with cholinergic agents, II:794–795 discoloration of from antituberculosis agents, I:311 in dry mouth, II:1109–1110 leeches, III:1970 in Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3063 Saliva substitutes, II:1109, 1110 Salivary duct obstruction dry mouth from, II:1109 salivary gland scan for, IV:2932 Salivary gland biopsy, II:1109 Salivary gland disorders Satiety Satiety. See Satiation Satin flower. See Chickweed Saturated fats. See Dietary fats Savant syndrome, I:418 Saw palmetto, IV:2945–2948, 2947 for benign prostate gland, IV:2945–2948 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1204 for impotence, III:1806 for prostatitis, IV:2741 Sawyer extractor, V:3563 Scabicides, IV:3076 Scabies, IV:2948–2951, 2949f, 2950, 3076 hives from, III:1642 itching from, III:1874 vs. lice, III:1995 vs. schistosomiasis, IV:2955 Scabs, IV:3075 Scaling, IV:2755, 3075 Scalp seborrheic dermititis of, IV:2980 tinea and, IV:2908, 2909 Scalp psoriasis, IV:2755 Scalp reduction for alopecia, I:126 with hair transplantation, III:1499 Scalp ringworm. See Tinea Scapula, IV:2920 Scapula surgery, III:2266 Scapular winging, III:2266 Scapuloiliopereoneal atrophy with cardiopathy. See Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy Scar tissue, IV:3075 ectropion and entropion from, II:1271 from gonorrhea, III:1472 from granuloma inguinale, III:1483, 1484 in nasal trauma, IV:2318 in Peyronie’s disease, IV:2572 with pigmentation disorders, IV:3078 from priapism, IV:2715 from skin lesion removal, IV:3074 skin resurfacing and, IV:3079 from smallpox, IV:3096 ultrasonography for, I:1–2 Scarification, IV:2599 Scarlatina. See Scarlet fever Scarlatinella. See Rash Scarlet fever, IV:2951–2953 cold agglutinins test for, II:843 vs. fifth disease, II:1328 with glomerulonephritis, III:1462 vs. Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 with nephritis, IV:2334 rash from, IV:2820 from strep throat, IV:3120 strep throat and, IV:3179 3894 streptococcal antibody tests for, IV:3180, 3182 Scars from atopic dermatitis, I:403 from breast implants, I:586 from breast reconstruction, I:589 in bronchiectasis, I:596 from burns, I:619 from corneal abrasion, II:918 from cryotherapy, II:963 duodenal obstruction from, II:1110 from face lift, II:1276 hypertrophic (See Keloids) from interstitial lung diseases, III:1774, 1775 from jaw fixation devices, III:1885 from keratitis, III:1904 from laser surgery, III:1959, 1963 from liver failure, III:2028 from lung diseases, III:2051 from mastectomy, III:2130 from myomectomy, III:2293 from piercing and tattoos, IV:2599 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 from TORCH tests, V:3339 wound repair and, III:1937–1938 from wounds, V:3583 SCD. See Sudden cardiac death Scented mayweed. See Chamomile Schatzki’s ring. See Lower esophageal ring Schedule II drugs. See Narcotics Scheie syndrome, III:2228–2229 Scheile syndrome. See Mucopolysaccharidoses Scheuermann’s disease, III:1932, IV:2415 Schiller, Lawrence R., II:1301 Schilling test for malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 for pernicious anemia, IV:2558 Schistosoma haematobium, IV:2953 Schistosoma intercalatum, IV:2953 Schistosoma japonicum, IV:2953 Schistosoma mansoni, IV:2953 Schistosoma mekongi, IV:2953 Schistosomiasis, IV:2953–2956, 2954 Schizencephaly, II:890 Schizoaffective disorders, IV:2765, IV:2956–2958 Schizoid personality disorder, IV:2563, 2564–2567, 2767–2768 Schizophrenia, IV:2958–2963 vs. anorexia nervosa, I:212 anxiety disorder and, I:323 Bender-Gestalt test for, I:465 vs. bipolar disorder, I:487 catatonia with, II:676 in children, II:762, 765 with delusions, II:1022 vs. dissociative disorders, II:1087 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 with dronabinol, II:644 electroconvulsive therapy for, II:1149 electroencephalography for, II:1151 family therapy for, II:1287, 1288 hallucinations from, III:1504 Holtzman inkblot test for, III:1655 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1880 from manganese toxicity, III:2195 vs. mutism, III:2272 pica and, IV:2595 psychosis in, IV:2765 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2767–2768 vs. schizencephaly, II:890 vs. schizoaffective disorder, IV:2956–2958 smelling disorders with, IV:3099 from substance abuse, IV:3208 substance abuse and, IV:3208 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 Schizophreniform disorder psychosis in, IV:2765 psychosocial aspects of, IV:2767–2768 Schizotypal personality disorder, IV:2563–2567 Schloss tea. See Marsh mallow Schmidt’s syndrome, IV:2663 School behavior, II:1288, IV:3208 School placement, IV:3153 Schools, III:1994, 1996 Schwann cells in peripheral neuropathy, IV:2549 tumors of, I:570 Schwannoma. See Neurilemmoma Schweitzer, Albert as vegetarian, V:3485 Sciatic nerve, III:2031–2032 Sciatic neuralgia. See Sciatica Sciatica, IV:2550, IV:2963–2965 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 from herniated disk, III:1628 with low back pain, III:2031, 2033 vs. sacroiliac disease, IV:2931 from scoliosis, IV:2973 SCID. See Severe combined immunodeficiency disease SCID-D. See Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients, III:1921 Scintigraphy. See Radionuclide imaging Scintillation cameras. See Gamma cameras Sclera in glaucoma, III:1457, 1459–1460 slit lamp examination for, II:1263 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in elephantiasis, II:1167 with epididymitis, II:1218 in hydrocelectomy, III:1686 physical examination of, IV:2594 in vasectomy, V:3481 Scrub palmetto. See Saw palmetto Scrub typhus, IV:2975–2977, V:3423–3424 Scuba diving. See Diving Scullcap. See Skullcap Scullcap leaf, for drug addictions, II:833 Scurvy, IV:2977–2979, 2978 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 rash from, IV:2821 urinalysis for, V:3445 from vitamin C deficiency, IV:3161, V:3525 Scutellaria lateriflora. See Skullcap Sea buckthorn. See Buckthorn Seasickness. See Motion sickness Seasonal affective disorder, IV:2590–2591, IV:2979–2980 Seasonal allergic rhinitis. See Hay fever Seasons, bipolar disorder from, I:486 Seat belts for dental trauma prevention, II:1030 for spinal cord injury prevention, IV:3132 for traumatic amputations prevention, V:3378 for whiplash prevention, V:3556 for wound prevention, V:3583 Seatworm infection. See Enterobiasis Sebaceous follicles, in acne, I:24 Sebaceous moles. See Nevus Seborrheic dermatitis, II:1037, IV:2980–2981, 2981, 3075 diaper rash and, II:1062 Sebum, I:24, 25, 226 Secobarbital for central nervous system depression, II:689 with hydroxyzine, I:285 for insomnia, I:282 with prochlorperazine, I:294 withdrawal from, V:3572 Seconal. See Secobarbital Second-degree burns. See Burns Second impact syndrome, II:878 Second pregnancy trimester, I:11–12 Secondary adrenocortical insufficiency, I:54 Secondary aldosteronism. See Hyperaldosteronism Secondary brain tumor. See Brain cancer; Brain tumors Secondary cancer brain (See Brain cancer; Brain tumors) with chemotherapy, II:743 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647 Secondary diabetes, II:1049 Secondary enuresis. See Bed-wetting Secondary erythrocytosis. See Secondary polycythemia; Spurious polycythemia Secondary hypothyroidism. See Hypothyroidism Secondary osteoarthritis. See Osteoarthritis Secondary polycythemia, IV:2981–2983 Secondary Sjögren’s syndrome. See Sjögren’s syndrome Secondhand smoke, IV:3104 atherosclerosis from, I:394 heart attacks from, III:1532 lung cancer and, III:2044, 2046, 2049 pneumonia and, IV:2638 sore throat from, IV:3118 Sectral. See Acebutolol Security measures psychiatric confinement for, IV:2760 for PTSD prevention, IV:2687 Sed rate. See Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Sedation, II:1165, IV:2983–2984 Sedatives. See Hypnotics and sedatives Sedimentation rate. See Erythrocyte sedimentation rate Seed corn. See Corns Segmental mastectomy. See Lumpectomy Segmented resection, for lung diseases, III:2053, 2054 Seibert, Florence, V:3408 Seizures, IV:2984–2990, 2985, 2987 with anticancer agents, I:247 with antimalarials, I:288 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311, 312–313 from arbovirus encephalitis, I:347 ARDS from, I:68 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 in autonomic dysreflexia, IV:3129 barbiturates for, I:445 benzodiazepines and, I:466, 467, 468 from brain abscess, I:566 from brain surgery, I:568, 573 central nervous system depressants for, II:688, 689 from cephalosporins, I:241 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790 with cisapride, I:272 3895 Seizures Scleral buckling, IV:2877 Scleroderma, I:422, 423, IV:2965–2969, 2967 with ACE inhibitors, I:204 antinuclear antibody test for, I:294–295 vs. graft vs. host disease, III:1481 heartburn from, III:1553 pulmonary hypertension from, IV:2785 with radiation therapy, III:2036, 2128 from Raynaud disease, IV:2823 Sjögren’s syndrome with, IV:3063 skin ulcer from, IV:3075 telangiectasia from, IV:3075 Sclerosant, IV:2969 Sclerosis, IV:2629–2630 Sclerotherapy for angiomas, I:495, 496 for esophageal varices, IV:2969–2970 for impotence, III:1806 for varicose veins, V:3477 Scoliometer, IV:2971 Scoliosis, IV:2970–2973, 2971 Alexander technique for, I:105 cerebral palsy, II:704 from cutis laxa, II:978 from Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, II:1139 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 from Marfan syndrome, III:2115 from muscular dystrophy, III:2263 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 spinal instrumentation for, IV:3134 surgery for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 Scombroid, II:1335 Scopolamine delirium from, II:1021 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for motion sickness, III:2219 overdose, II:1104 for Parkinson disease, I:296 Scotch mercury. See Foxglove Scott, Dave, as vegetarian, V:3485 Scrapie. See Spongiform encephalopathy Scratch test. See Percutaneous allergy tests Screening mammogram. See Mammography Screws. See Bone screws Scrotal cancer, III:1686 Scrotal nuclear medicine scan, IV:2973–2974 Scrotal ultrasound, IV:2974–2975 Scrotum, V:3256 abnormalities of, ultrasound for, IV:2974–2975 in chancroid, II:729 Seizures from CNS infections, II:690 from cocaine, II:832 from congenital brain defects, II:891 from conversion disorder, IV:3114 from craniotomy, II:948 from decongestants, II:1012 from DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 dizziness from, II:1095 with Down syndrome, II:1099 drugs for (See Anticonvulsants) from electroconvulsive therapy, II:1149 electroencephalography and, II:1152 from encephalitis, II:1178 from epoetin, II:643, 645 from fainting, II:1281 from fever, II:1316 from fluke infection, II:1343 from fluoroquinolones, II:1346 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 from head injuries, III:1520, 1522 from heat stress disorders, III:1557 from hemolytic uremic syndrome, II:1205 from hyponatremia, III:1743 from hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1794 ipecac and, III:1859 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1880 from Krabbe’s disease, III:2004 from lead poisoning, III:1966 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 from measles, III:2139 from meningitis, III:2155, 2156 with methadone, III:2182 from mineral toxicity, III:2194 from multiple sclerosis, III:2250 from mumps, III:2255 from myelography, III:2285 with nalidixic acid, V:3448 with near drowning, IV:2327, 2328 from neonatal jaundice, IV:2331 from nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 from neurofibromatosis, IV:2345 neurologic examination for, IV:2350 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2006 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 from overhydration, IV:2449 from pituitary tumors, IV:2607 polysomnography for, IV:2668 from protease inhibitors, IV:2742 from regional anesthesia, I:192 respiratory alkalosis and, IV:2862 from roseola, IV:2919, 2920 from sarcoidosis, IV:2940 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 smoking cessation drugs with, IV:3110 SSRIs with, IV:2992 3896 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3203 from subdural hematoma, IV:3205 from Tay-Sachs disease, III:2004 from theophylline, I:383 from toxoplasmosis, V:3349 from trauma, IV:2986 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 from vaccines, V:3467 from vasculitis, V:3478 from vitamin D deficiency, V:3516 See also Anticonvulsants Seldane. See Terfenadine Seldane-D. See Terfenadine Selective abortion, I:8–9 Selective estrogen receptor modulators, IV:2427 Selective immunoglobulin deficiency. See Dysgammaglobulinemia Selective mutism. See Mutism Selective reduction. See Abortion, selective Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, IV:2990–2993 for anorexia nervosa, I:213 for anxiety, I:231, 320–321 for bipolar disorder, I:256–258, 487 for dementia, II:1026 for depression, II:1034 gender differences and, IV:2573, 2574 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 impotence from, III:1805 for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 with MAO inhibitors, II:1102 for mood disorders, III:2217 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for phobias, I:73, IV:2583 for PMS, IV:2710–2711 for premature ejaculation, IV:2700 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 sexual dysfunction from, IV:3052 for somatoform disorders, IV:3116 stuttering and, IV:3199 Selegeline, I:257, IV:2502 for Alzheimer’s disease, II:1024 for cocaine addiction, II:833 for Parkinson disease, I:296 Selenate, III:2190 Selenite in mineral deficiencies, III:2190 in nutrition, III:2196 toxicity, III:2195 Selenium aging and, I:71 with Atkins diet, I:402 for cancer, II:637 for coronary heart disease, II:931 deficiency of, III:2190–2193 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for endometriosis, II:1194 for ischemia, III:1871 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 supplements of, III:2196 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 toxicity, III:2194–2195 Selenium sulfide shampoo for blepharitis, II:1273 for seborrheic dermatitis, IV:2981 for tinea, IV:2909 Selenomethionine, III:2193 Self-actualization, III:1676 Self-awareness, in Gestalt therapy, III:1445–1446 Self-care for anemia, I:183–184 with mental retardation, III:2175 with reiki, IV:2850 for STDs, IV:3022 with urinary catheterization, V:3450 for warts, V:3549 Self-centeredness, III:1677 Self esteem, V:3455 with art therapy, I:367 with bed-wetting, I:455 in child abuse, II:754 in conduct disorder, II:883 group therapy for, III:1485 in mania, III:2112 in oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2397 Self-examination for cancer, II:634 in men’s health, III:2166 for RMSF prevention, IV:2911 for skin cancer, IV:3068 Self-help, III:1677 Self-help groups for adjustment disorders, I:59 for anorexia nervosa, I:213 for child abuse, II:756 for depression, II:1036 for enterostomy patients, II:1211 vs. group therapy, III:1485 for mania, III:2113 for psychosocial disorders, IV:2768 for substance abuse, IV:3210 Self-hypnosis, IV:3032 Self-image, IV:3115 Self-inflicted injuries, III:2257–2258 from Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, III:1983 from Tourette syndrome, V:3341 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3128–3129 Sense organs in balance, IV:2372 in dizziness, II:1094 in movement disorders, III:2221 in pain, IV:2459–2460 Sensitivity tests for blood culture, I:523 for inclusion conjunctivitis, III:1811 for pyelonephritis, IV:2789 Sensitivity training, III:1676 Sensorimotor paralysis chronic (See Chronic sensorimotor paralysis) subacute (See Subacute sensorimotor paralysis) Sensory awareness, III:2226 Sensory deprivation, III:1504 Sensory disorders. See Sensation disorders Sensory examination, IV:2350, 2352 Sensory integration disorder, IV:3002–3003 Sensory integration dysfunction. See Sensory integration disorder Sensory Integration International, IV:3002 Sensory perceptions, with LSD, III:2073 Sensory system disorders. See Sensation disorders Sentinel headaches, IV:3202 Sentinel lymph node biopsy. See Lymph node biopsy Seoul virus. See Hantaviruses SEP. See Serum electrophoresis Separation anxiety disorder, I:323 Sepia, for tinea, IV:2909 Sepsis, IV:3004 acute kidney failure from, I:44 ARDS from, I:67 from bowel preparation, I:562–563 circulation and, III:1999 debridement for, II:1007 from decubitus ulcer, I:458 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 from erysipelas, II:1225 from hemophilus infections, III:1587 from impetigo, III:1802 vs. infant botulism, I:560 from listeriosis, III:2013 from necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 from premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2744 from splenectomy (See Post splenectomy sepsis) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3346 Septal defects, II:900–901 cardiac catheterization for, II:656 from Down syndrome, II:1099 heart murmurs from, III:1541 Septal hematoma from nasal trauma, IV:2317, 2318 Septic abscess. See Abscess Septic arthritis. See Infectious arthritis Septic bursitis. See Bursitis Septic shock, IV:3004–3006, IV:3034 from bacteremia, I:436 infectious arthritis and, III:1819–1820 from leptospirosis, III:1981, 1982 Septicemia from abscess, I:15 acute kidney failure from, I:44 from acute lymphangitis, I:47 from congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 from cutaneous anthrax, I:224 from E. coli, II:1235 ECMO for, II:1256 from empyema, II:1176 hypotension from, III:1752 from lymphadenitis, III:2065 lymphedema from, III:2067 maternal prematurity from, IV:2706 from melioidosis, III:2150, 2151 from necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 nephrotoxic injury from, IV:2336–2338 from prostatitis, IV:2741 from PTHC, IV:2533 streptococcal antibody tests for, IV:3180 from toothache, V:3337 topical antibiotics and, I:245 from vibriosis, V:3506 from yersiniosis, V:3592 Septicemic plague. See Plague Septoplasty, IV:3006–3007 for deviated septum, II:1045 nasal packing for, IV:2314 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 Septra. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole Septum in congenital heart disease, II:900 lesions from leishmaniasis, III:1975 Sequestered disk chemonucleolysis and, II:739 See also Herniated disk Sequestra, IV:2420 Sequestration neutropenia from, IV:2354 in splenectomy, IV:3139 Serenoa. See Saw palmetto 3897 Serenoa Self-mutilation, IV:2993–2994 piercing and tattoos as, IV:2598 SSRIs for, IV:2990 Self-Report Manic Inventory, I:486 Self-testing. See Self-examination Selver, Charlotte, III:2226 Seman, Dr. James, IV:2699 Seman’s technique, IV:3014 Semen analysis of, III:1826–1827, IV:2994–2996 in infertility, III:1832 in vasectomy, V:3481 Semicircular canals, IV:2371–2372 Seminal vesicles, III:1832 Seminoma tumors, V:3256 Senescence, programmed, I:70 Sengstaken-Blakemore tube, V:3399 Senile angiomas. See Cherry angiomas Senile cataracts, II:674 Senile disciform degeneration. See Macular degeneration Senile macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration Senile plaques, in Alzheimer’s disease, II:1024 Senile tremor. See Tremor Senior’s health, IV:2996–3001, 3001t conditions, IV:2996–2998 treatment for, IV:2998–3000 Senna for constipation, II:906, 907 as laxative, III:1964 Senokot. See Senna Sensate focus, IV:2699–2700 Sensate focus therapy, IV:3014 Sensation applied kinesiology and, III:1924–1925 tests, before heat treatment, III:1560 Sensation disorders with autism, I:418–419 from breast reconstruction, I:587 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 from Charcot’s joints, II:736 from conversion disorder, IV:3114 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 from diabetic neuropathies, II:1057 from endarterectomy, II:1182 evoked potential studies for, II:1159 with heat treatment, III:1559 from lumpectomy, III:2037 from mastectomy, III:2130 movement disorders from, III:2221 from neurogenic bladder, IV:2346–2347 neurologic examination for, IV:2350, 2352 paresthesia as, IV:2365 with sciatica, IV:2965 in somatoform disorders, IV:3114 Serenoa repens Serenoa repens. See Saw palmetto Serevent. See Salmeterol xinafoate Seroconversion, I:82, 86 Serologic tests for hantaviruses, III:1508 for meningitis, III:2156 Serology. See Blood tests Seroma, I:589 Seromycin. See Cycloserine Seronoa repens. See Saw palmetto Serophene. See Clomiphene Seroquel. See Quetiapine Serotonin with antidepressants, I:256, 257 in bipolar disorder, I:487 in carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 gender differences and, IV:2574 intermittent explosive disorder and, III:1846 LSD and, III:2073 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214 in migraines, III:2187 in mood disorders, III:2216 obsessive-compulsive disorder and, IV:2381–2382 personality disorders and, IV:2565 phototherapy and, IV:2590 in PMS, IV:2710 Serotonin agents, IV:3019 Serotonin antagonists, III:2189 Serotonin boosters. See Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors Serotonin dopamine antagonists, for schizophrenia, IV:2962 Serotonin reuptake inhibitors with LSD, III:2074 for PTSD, IV:2686 selective (See Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) Serous cavity filariasis. See Filariasis Serratia, enterobacterial infections from, II:1204 Sertindole, for psychosis, IV:2766 Sertraline, I:256, IV:2990 with antimigraine agents, I:291 for bipolar disorder, I:487 for depression, II:1034 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 for intermittent explosive disorder, III:1846 for mood disorders, III:2217 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for paraphilias, IV:3019 for phobias, I:73, IV:2583 for PMS, IV:2710–2711 for premature ejaculation, IV:2700 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2979 Serum albumin 3898 with hypercalcemia, III:1697 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme. See Angiotensin-converting enzyme Serum angiotensin-converting enzyme test. See Angiotensin-converting enzyme test Serum assays for botulism, I:561 for fibrin split products, II:1319 for immune complex test, III:1783 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2086–2087 for phosphorus imbalance, IV:2585 Serum electrophoresis, IV:2746–2747 Serum ferritin tests, III:1681 Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase. See Aspartate aminotransferase Serum hepatitis. See Hepatitis B Serum iron test, III:1863 Serum lactate test, I:217 Serum lipids, II:792 Serum protein electrophoresis. See Protein electrophoresis Serum prothrombin conversion accelerator deficiency. See Hemophilia Serum sickness, IV:3007–3009 from antivenin, I:501 with vasculitis, V:3479 Serum therapy. See Gammaglobulins Serum triglycerides, III:1477 Services Research Outcomes Study, II:833 Sesame oil, II:643 Sestamibi, V:3278 Sestamibi scan. See Thallium heart scan Seventh-day Adventists, V:3485 Severe combined immunodeficiency disease, III:1785, 1787, IV:2636, IV:3009–3011 Sevofluorane, for general anesthesia, I:186 Sewage cholera from, II:781 listeriosis from, III:2012 tapeworm infections from, V:3239–3240 Sex change, III:1418, IV:3011–3012 Sex drive with hypothyroidism, III:1756 after hysterectomy, III:1763 sexual dysfunctions and, II:1308, IV:3016 sildenafil citrate for, IV:3051–3052 after vasectomy, V:3482 Sex hormone-binding globulin, IV:3013 Sex hormone tests, III:1805, IV:3012–3014 Sex hormones in breast cancer, III:1745 chasteberry and, I:369–370 decline in, with aging, I:69 hypogonadism from, III:1737–1738 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897, 1899 menopause and, III:2159 in prostate cancer, III:1745 Sex-linked chromosomes Klinefelter syndrome and, III:1926, 1927 in mucopolysaccharidoses, III:2228 Sex-linked inheritance birth defects from, I:491 carrier testing and, III:1433, 1435 Sex therapy, IV:3014–3015 for premature ejaculation, IV:2699–2700 for sexual dysfunctions, II:1309, IV:3016, 3017 Sexual abstinence for genital warts prevention, III:1445 for Reiter’s syndrome prevention, IV:2852 for syphilis prevention, IV:3230 Sexual abuse, I:16, 17, 18 anorexia nervosa from, I:212 of children, II:754, 763, III:2244–2245 conduct disorder from, II:883 paraphilias from, IV:3018 PTSD from, IV:2685 rape as, IV:2816 self mutilation from, IV:2993, 2994 somatoform disorders from, IV:3114 substance abuse and, IV:3211 Sexual activity cancer and, II:632–633, 637 cervicitis and, II:723 in conduct disorder, II:883 with coronary heart disease, II:929 with dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 with epididymitis, II:1219 foreign objects and, II:1359 gay and lesbian health and, III:1414, 1415 genital herpes and, III:1440 gonorrhea and, III:1472, 1474 granuloma inguinale and, III:1483, 1484 after hernia repair, III:1627 with herniated disk, III:1628 in hypogonadism, III:1738 lymphogranuloma venereum from, III:2071, 2072 with menopause, III:2159 miscarriage and, III:2204 nongonococcal urethritis from, IV:2359–2360 with oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3051, 3052 STD prevention and, IV:3022–3023 stress urinary incontinence from, III:2123, V:3454 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 hepatitis B as, III:1600 hepatitis C and, III:1603 hepatitis D as, III:1605 infection control for, III:1822 infertility and, III:1825 infertility from, III:1832 with IUDs, III:1876 lymphogranuloma venereum as, III:2071–2072 in men, III:2165, 2167 nongonococcal urethritis as, IV:2359 oral contraceptives and, IV:2401 pap smear for, IV:2484 pelvic exam for, IV:2517, 2519 perinatal infections from, IV:2540–2543 PID as, IV:2522–2523, 2524 with pregnancy, IV:2697 prevention condoms for, II:881–882 proctitis from, I:210, IV:2718 prostatitis as, IV:2740 with pubic lice, III:1995 from rape and sexual assault, IV:2817, 2818–2819 substance abuse and, IV:3206 trichomoniasis as, V:3540 tropical spastic paraparesis from, V:3395 urethritis as, V:3440 viral hepatitis as, III:1610–1611 vulvar cancer and, V:3536 Shaken baby syndrome, I:452, II:754, IV:3023–3025, 3024f Shampoo with coal tar (See Coal tar shampoo) with selenium sulfide (See Selenium sulfide shampoo) with selnium sulfide (See Selenium sulfide shampoo) with zinc pyrithione (See Zinc pyrithione shampoo) Shared psychotic disorder, II:1022 Shark cartilage endometrial cancer and, II:1191 for liver cancer, III:2021 for lung cancer, III:2045, 2049 for Paget’s disease of the breast, III:2158 Shark liver oil, I:275 Sharp debridement. See Debridement Shave-grass. See Horsetail Shaw, George Bernard, as vegetarian, V:3485 Sheehan’s syndrome, IV:2724 Sheep cell test, II:1072 Sheep liver fluke. See Fasciola hepatica Shell shock. See Post-traumatic stress disorder Shellfish allergy, II:657 hepatitis A from, III:1596 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 poisoning from, I:560, II:1334–1336, II:1353 vibriosis from, V:3506 Shepherd’s purse for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1114 for menorrhagia, III:2172 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 Shiatsu massage, I:37, III:2126, IV:3025–3027, IV:3190 Shigella dysentery from, IV:3027–3029 vs. E. coli, II:1236 enterobacterial infections from, II:1204 food poisoning from, II:1353, 1354 gastroenteritis from, III:1408 with loperamide, I:265 travelers diarrhea from, V:3379 Shigellosis, II:1354, III:1409, IV:3027–3030, 3029 Shiitake mushroom extract, II:804 Shin. See Tibia Shin bone fever. See Trench fever Shin splints, IV:3145 Shingles, IV:3031–3033, 3031 with anticancer agents, I:247 antiviral drugs for, I:315 after chickenpox, II:751, 753 conjunctivitis from, II:903 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 encephalitis from, II:1178 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 with immunosuppressive agents, III:1798 with immunotherapy, III:1792, 1794 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 neuralgia from, IV:2338, 2339–2340 peripheral neuropathy and, IV:2552 transverse myelitis from, V:3375 Tzanck preparation for, V:3424 Shivering in hypothermia, III:1754 from sedation, IV:2984 Shock, IV:3033–3035 acidosis from, III:2179 from adrenal crisis, II:885 in anaerobic infections, I:167 from anaphylaxis, I:179 from burns, I:618, III:2136 creatine kinase test for, II:948 from dehydration, II:1017 from dengue fever, II:1028 diabetic nausea with, IV:2325 electric (See Electric shock injuries) from flesh-eating disease, II:1337 fluid and electrolytes for, III:2191 from fractures, II:1363 from growth hormone stimulation test, III:1489 from hantaviruses, III:1508 3899 Shock syphilis and, IV:3226, 3230 after tubal ligation, V:3398 Sexual arousal disorder. See Sexual dysfunctions Sexual assault. See Sexual abuse Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner Development and Operation Guide, IV:2818 Sexual Assault Resource Service, IV:2818 Sexual aversion disorder, III:2168 Sexual behavior. See Sexual activity Sexual contact. See Sexual abuse Sexual development. See Puberty Sexual dysfunctions, IV:3015–3017 cell therapy for, II:686 erectile (See Erection disorders) with Gulf War syndrome, III:1495 paraphilias and, IV:3018–3019 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3130, 3132 from SSRIs, IV:2991, 2992 treatment for, IV:3014–3015 in women, II:1308–1309 Sexual identity, III:1414–1415, 1417 Sexual intercourse anal, IV:2719 cystitis from, II:992 discomfort after episiotomy, II:1223 female genital mutilation and, II:1306, 1307 gonorrhea from, III:1472 with infertility drugs, III:1830 Sexual maturation. See Puberty Sexual Maturity Rating stages, IV:2772 Sexual perversions. See Paraphilias Sexual response disorders (See Sexual dysfunctions) Sexually transmitted diseases, IV:3020–3023, 3021, 3022t balanitis with, I:440 Bartholin’s gland abscess as, I:450 brucellosis as, I:606 cerebrospinal fluid analysis for, II:706 cervicitis with, II:723 from Chlamydia trachomatis, II:771 circumcision and, II:812, 813 conjunctivitis from, II:903 corneal ulcers from, II:922 cytomegalovirus infections as, II:999 ectopic pregnancy and, II:1133 epididymitis from, II:1219 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 gay and lesbian health and, III:1414, 1415–1416, 1417 genital herpes as, III:1439–1440 genital warts as, I:172–173, V:3548 gonorrhea, III:1471–1475 granuloma inguinale, III:1482–1484 hemorrhagic fevers as, III:1590 hepatitis A as, III:1596 Shock from heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 with impedance phlebography, III:1800 from intestinal obstruction, III:1848 from intussusception, III:1856 from iron toxicity, III:2194 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1941 lactic acid test for, III:1944, 1945 after liposuction, III:2011 from listeriosis, III:2014 liver function tests for, III:2026 from myocardial resection, III:2288 from overhydration, IV:2449 from pancreatitis, IV:2479 from pelvic fractures, IV:2520 from serum sickness, IV:3008 from splenic trauma, IV:3141 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3157 from thoracentesis, V:3285 urinalysis for, V:3445 from ventricular fibrillation, V:3499 wilderness medicine for, V:3561 from wounds, V:3583 Shock lung. See Adult respiratory distress syndrome Shock wave lithotripsy. See Lithotripsy Shoes. See Footwear Shogaols, III:2219 Short bowel syndrome, III:2086, IV:2329 Short gut syndrome, IV:3174 Short-term group therapy. See Group therapy Short-term insomnia. See Transient insomnia Short-term memory, IV:3154 Short term psychosis, IV:2765 Shortness of breath. See Dyspnea; Dyspnea Shoshin. See Beriberi Shostrom, Everett, III:1676 Shoulder bursitis of, I:620 frozen from polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2666 imaging with MRI, III:2082 after mastectomy, III:2130 pain from cholecystectomy, II:778 polymyalgia rheumatica of, IV:2666 Shoulder blade. See Scapula Shoulder dislocation, I:361 Shoulder dystocia, IV:2384, 2385 Shoulder-hand syndrome. See Reflex sympathetic dystrophy 3900 Shoulder injuries, I:359–360 rotator cuff (See Rotator cuff injury) Shoulder joint arthroplasty for, I:361 arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 arthroscopy for, I:364 Shunt procedure, III:1543 for congenital heart disease, II:902 tooth extraction and, V:3332 Shunts liver (See Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt) liver encephalopathy from, III:2023 Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, I:337 Shy, Milton, IV:3038 Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038–3039 Shyness vs. mutism, III:2272 vs. social phobias, IV:2581–2582 SIADH antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 antidiuretic hormone test for, I:267 Siamese twins. See Conjoined twins Siberian ginseng aging and, I:71 for impotence, III:1806 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 Sibutramine, II:691 Sibutramine, for obesity, IV:2376 Sicca complex. See Sjögren’s syndrome Sick building syndrome, III:2235 Sick sinus syndrome, IV:3039–3041 Sickle cell anemia, I:182, 183, 184, IV:3041–3048, 3043 acid phosphatase test for, I:23 with bed-wetting, I:454 bone marrow transplantation for, I:550 chronic kidney failure from, II:806 color blindness from, II:860 with epoetin, II:643 ESR and, II:1231 fetal hemoglobin test and, II:1313 with fifth disease, II:1329 haptoglobin test for, III:1510 hemoglobin electrophoresis for, III:1575, 1576 as hemoglobinopathy, III:1577–1578 with epoetin, III:1793 with hemolytic anemia, III:1579 hypercoagulation from, III:1701 hypogonadism from, III:1738 jaundice from, III:1882 meningitis from, III:2154 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 osteomyelitis from, IV:2419 priapism from, IV:2715 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 from recessive inheritance, I:491 red blood cell indices for, IV:2839 renal tubular acidosis and, IV:2858 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2935 Sickle cell crisis, I:182 Sickle cell retinopathy, IV:2890 Sickle cell trait, IV:3041–3042, 3048 Sickledex test, IV:3045 SID. See Sensory integration disorder Side-flowering skullcap. See Skullcap Sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048–3049 Sidestream smoke, IV:3104 SIDS. See Sudden infant death syndrome; Sudden infant death syndrome Siegel-Cattan-Mamou syndrome. See Familial Mediterranean fever Sigmoid bowel preparation of, I:562–563 in diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1091 enemas for, II:1200 in ulcerative colitis, V:3430 Sigmoid colon. See Sigmoid Sigmoidoscopy, IV:3049–3051, 3050f for amebiasis, I:144 for anorectal disorders, I:210 for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239 for balantidiasis, I:441 barium enema and, I:448 bowel preparation for, I:562–563 for cancer, II:634 for colon cancer, II:851 for constipation, II:906 for familial polyposis, II:1286 FOBT and, II:1302 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 for IBS, III:1866 for intestinal polyps, III:1851 for iron deficiency anemia, III:1861 in men’s health, III:2166 for Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597 for rectal polyps, IV:2834 for rectal prolapse, IV:2835 SII. See Sensory Integration International SIL. See Cervical dysplasia Silastic, II:1123 Sildenafil citrate, IV:3051–3055 for impotence, III:1805 with prostate cancer, IV:2733 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 Silent heart attacks. See Heart attack Silent ischemia. See Ischemia Silent thyroiditis, V:3319, 3320 Silica for abscesses, I:14 for carbuncle, I:537 for furunculosis, I:537 for osteoporosis, IV:2427 pulmonary fibrosis from, III:1774, IV:2782 silicosis from, IV:3055 Silica dust, I:505 Silica gel type H, IV:2310 Silicea GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Sinus x-ray. See Skull x-ray Sinuses, IV:3057 CAT scan of, II:875, 877 in cystic fibrosis, II:986 formation from mycetoma, III:2275 in hypophysectomy, III:1745 imaging with MRI, III:2082 lacrimal duct obstruction and, III:1938 with mucormycosis, III:2231 in nosebleeds, IV:2364 physical examination of, IV:2593 x-rays of, V:3587 Sinusitis, IV:3057–3060, 3059f with asthma, I:380 bad breath from, I:437 brain abscess from, I:566 CAT scan for, II:875, II:877 cellulitis from, II:684 CNS infections from, II:690 cough from, II:941 deviated septum and, II:1045 endoscopy for, IV:3056–3057 from enterobacteriaceae, II:1204 from hemophilus infections, III:1587 with measles, III:2139 nasal irrigation for, IV:2312 from nasal packing, IV:2314 with nasal polyps, IV:2316 orbital and periorbital cellulitis from, IV:2407 osteomyelitis from, IV:2419 skull x-rays for, IV:3082 sore throat from, IV:3118 tests for, I:118 from Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 from XLA, V:3585 with XLA, V:3585 Sipple syndrome. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia Sirolimus with cyclosporine, III:1796, 1798 SIS. See Saline infusion sonography Siti. See Bejel Sitting meditation. See Meditation Situs inversus, IV:3060–3061 Situs solitus, IV:3060 Sitz bath, III:1692, IV:3061–3063, 3062f for Bartholin’s gland cysts, I:450 after episiotomy, II:1222 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for prostatitis, IV:2741 Sjögren’s syndrome, I:422, 424, IV:3063–3064 antinuclear antibody test for, I:294–295 dry mouth from, II:1109 paresthesia from, IV:2365 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 salivary gland scan for, IV:2932 tarsorrhaphy and, V:3243 Skelaxin. See Metaxalone Skeletal traction. See Traction Skeleton, III:2236 Skerljevo. See Bejel Skin abnormalities of cryotherapy for, II:962 from dry mouth, II:1109 abscess of, I:15 from nocardiosis, IV:2358 absorption heavy metal poisoning from, III:1560 aging of face lift for, II:1275 from sunburn, IV:3218 artificial for grafts, IV:3070 bleeding from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 blue from cyanosis, II:980 in PAP, IV:2776 coloration with antituberculosis agents, I:311, 312 with Depo-Provera/Norplant, II:1032 disorders (See Pigmentation disorders) with flesh-eating disease, II:1337 with stridor, IV:3193 damage to from laser surgery, III:1963 from radiation injuries, IV:2809 from tanning devices, IV:3220 darkening of from sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 in dehydration, II:1017 dry itching from, III:1875 in nummular dermatitis, II:1037 with psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 electrodes with sphincter electromyography, II:1255 fungal infections of KOH test for, III:1929 graft vs. host disease and, III:1481 hemorrhaging from hemorrhagic fevers, III:1591, 1592 in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 injuries flesh-eathing disease from, II:1336, 1337 genital herpes outbreaks from, III:1440 repair of, III:1936–1938 3901 Skin for otitis media, IV:2435 for sinusitis, IV:3059 Silicone in breast implants, I:586, 587, 589 extrinsic allergic alveolitis from, III:1717 Silicosis, III:2054, IV:3055–3056 Silo-filler’s disease, III:2050 Silver bells. See Cramp bark Silver nitrate, for Bartholin’s gland cyst, I:450 Silybum marianum. See Milk thistle Simethicone for colic, II:847 for gas, I:271 Simian crease, II:1099 Simon, Paul-Max, I:367 Simon, Theophilus, IV:3153 Simple carbohydrates. See Carbohydrates Simple fractures. See Fractures Simple mastectomy, III:2129 Simple phobias. See Phobias Simple retinopathy. See Retinopathy Simple tics. See Tic disorders Simulect. See Basiliximab Simvastatin for high cholesterol, II:789, 790 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 for hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1708 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552 Sin Nombre virus. See Hantaviruses Sinemet. See Levodopa Sinemet CR. See Antiparkinson drugs Singapore, hand-foot-and-mouth disease in, III:1506 Singer’s nodules. See Vocal cord nodules Singing, III:2269 Single-contrast enema. See Barium enema Single photon emission computed tomography for Alzheimer’s disease, I:137 with bone nuclear medicine scan, I:555–556 for brain tumor, I:571 for gastrinomas, III:1403 vs. PET scan, IV:2678 with thallium heart scan, V:3278 Singulair. See Montelukast Sinoatrial node, II:1163 Sinus endoscopy, IV:3056–3057 Sinus infections. See Sinusitis Sinus nodes in arrhythmias, I:352 in bundle branch block, I:614 Sinus transillumination for sinusitis, IV:3058 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 Skin aging in mastocytosis, III:2132 menopause and, III:2159 moisture loss in with atopic dermatitis, I:403 physical examination of, IV:2593 in polycythemia vera, IV:2658 pressure receptors in motion sickness, III:2218 resistance in electric shock injuries, II:1143 retinoic acid for, V:3512 Skin aging botulinum toxin injections for, I:558 face lift for, II:1275 skin resurfacing for, IV:3079 from sunburn, IV:3218 Skin allergy, II:1019 Skin angiomas. See Angiomas Skin biopsy, IV:3064–3066 for alopecia, I:126 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:976 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for erythema nodosum, II:1227 for keloids, III:1903 for mastocytosis, III:2132 for melanoma, III:2097 for moles, III:2211 for non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3067 for photosensitivity, IV:2590 for pigmentation disorders, IV:3078 for pityriasis rosea, IV:2609 for skin lesion removal, IV:3072 for skin lesions, IV:3076 for South American blastomycosis, IV:3121 for staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, IV:3160–3161 Skin cancer, II:631, 632, 633 albinism and, I:88, 91 aldesleukin for, III:1791 anal cancer from, I:170 biopsy for, IV:3065 from coal tar, I:405 cryotherapy for, II:962 cutaneous T-cell lymphoma as, II:975–977 genital warts and, V:3547 vs. granuloma inguinale, III:1483 in hyperpigmentation, III:1715 laser surgery for, III:1960 liver cancer from, III:2019 of melanocytes (See Melanoma) from moles, III:2210, 2211 vs. moles, IV:3078 non-melanoma, IV:3066–3068, 3067 papule and plaques from, IV:3074 physcial examination for, II:634 with pigmentation disorders, IV:3078 from sun exposure, IV:2589, 3220 sunburn and, IV:3218, 3219 3902 from ultraviolet light treatment, V:3435, 3436 Skin cleansers, I:307 Skin conditions ichthyosis, III:1771–1773 from neurofibromatosis, IV:2344–2345 pseudoxanthoma elasticum, IV:2753–2755 from scleroderma, IV:2966–2967 from Turner syndrome, V:3418 Skin culture, IV:3068–3069 Skin diseases, IV:2374 aromatherapy for, I:348, 349 biopsy for, IV:3065 with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 from complement deficiencies, II:874 cryotherapy for, II:962 culture for, IV:3068–3069 from diarrhea, II:1066 erythema multiforme, II:1226–1227 immunosuppressive agents for, III:1795 itching from, III:1874 laser surgery for, III:1959–1960 lichen planus as, III:1996–1997 in men, III:2165 from meningococcemia, III:2157 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 rash from, IV:2820–2821 from Refsum disease, III:2004 from sulfonamides, IV:3217 traction and, V:3357 ultraviolet light treatment for, V:3435 Skin fluorescent studies, I:159 Skin-fold thickness, III:2104 Skin grafts, IV:3069–3072, 3070, 3071f for bites, I:501 for burns, I:619 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for hearing loss, III:1529 for hyperhidrosis, III:1704 leeches for, III:1971 for meningococcemia, III:2158 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for sex change surgery, IV:3011 for syndactyly, IV:2661 for toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3346 for vitiligo, IV:3078, V:3527 Skin infections. See Infectious skin diseases Skin lesion removal, IV:3072–3074 cryotherapy for, II:962 for granuloma inguinale, III:1483 Skin lesions, IV:3074–3077, 3075f from erythema multiforme, II:1226 from gonorrhea, III:1474 from leprosy, III:1977–1979 vs. melanoma, III:2097 from non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3066–3068 from riboflavin deficiency, IV:2906 from seborrheic dermatitis, IV:2980 from shingles, IV:3031 from smallpox, IV:3096–3097, IV:3097 from South American blastomycosis, IV:3121 from telangiectasia, I:388 from toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3345 Skin necrosis, I:499, 500, 501 Skin nodules, II:1227 Skin peel, IV:2717 Skin perfusion measurements, I:159 Skin pores, I:226 Skin rash. See Rash Skin resurfacing, IV:3079–3081 for acne, I:26 with blepharoplasty, I:518 with face lift, II:1275 in plastic surgery, IV:2621 for skin resurfacing, IV:3079, 3080 for tattoo removal, IV:2599 Skin-sparing mastectomy. See Mastectomy Skin tests for ABPA, I:108 for allergic rhinitis, I:112 for allergies, I:117, 123–124 for amputation, I:159 for anaphylaxis, I:179 for anthrax, I:224–225 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1717 FUO and, II:1318 for glycogen storage diseases, III:1467 for histoplamsosis, III:1640 for leishmaniasis, III:1976 for pinta, IV:2603 for serum sickness, IV:3008 for TB, III:1957 Skin traction. See Traction Skin tumors biopsy for, IV:3065 from Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 Skin ulcer, IV:3075 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from bunions, I:615 with Crohn’s disease, II:957 culture for, IV:3068 from granuloma inguinale, III:1483, 1484 from impetigo, III:1802 from iodine toxicity, III:2194 from life support, III:2001 from mycobacterial infections, III:2277 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597–2598 polysomnography for, IV:2668–2669 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 syndromes, IV:3087–3088 T & A for, V:3325 Sleep apnea syndromes. See Sleep apnea Sleep attacks. See Narcolepsy Sleep deprivation, II:1297 vs. dissociative disorders, II:1086, 1087 with fibromyalgia, II:1326 hallucinations from, III:1504 night terrors from, IV:2356 Sleep disorders, IV:3086–3092, 3089 from atopic dermatitis, I:404 from benzodiazepines, I:468 benzodiazepines for, I:466 biofeedback for, I:482 from caffeine, II:625 from child abuse, II:754 with chronic fatigue syndrome, II:802 from decongestants, II:1011–1012 electroencephalography for, II:1151 from general adaptation syndrome, III:1425 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 with hypothyroidism, III:1756 from infertility drugs, III:1831 from liver encephalopathy, III:2023 MAO inhibitors for, III:2213 in men, III:2168 as migraine trigger, III:2188 from mood disorders, III:2216 night terrors, IV:2355–2356 polysomnography for, IV:2668–2669 from PTSD, IV:2686 senior’s health and, IV:2997, 3000 from silicosis, IV:3055 from smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 with substance withdrawal, V:3573 Sleep drunkenness. See Hypersomnia Sleep EEG. See Electroencephalography Sleep latency tests, IV:2597 Sleep paralysis. See Narcolepsy Sleep positions, IV:3113 Sleep-restriction therapy, III:1844 Sleep terror. See Night terrors Sleep-wake patterns of elderly, IV:2997 for insomnia, III:1844 Sleeping sickness. See Trypanosomiasis Sleeping sickness, African. See African trypanosomiasis GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Sleeplessness. See Insomnia Sleepwalking, IV:2668, 3089 Slings, III:1781 Slipped disk. See Herniated disk Slippery elm for furunculosis, I:538 for gastroenteritis, III:1409 with marsh mallow and echinacea for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for sore throats, IV:3120 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 Slippery root. See Comfrey Slit lamp examination, II:1263 for eyelid diseases, II:1272 for glaucoma, III:1459 for hyphema, III:1728 for keratitis, III:1905 for pinguecula and pterygium, IV:2602 for uveitis, V:3462 Slow-Acting Antirheumatic Drugs, I:305 Slow wave sleep. See Non-REM sleep Sly disease, III:2230 Sly syndrome. See Mucopolysaccharidoses Small cell lung cancer, III:2046–2050, 2047, 2048 Small-for-gestational-age infant, V:3338 Small intestinal polyps. See Intestinal polyps Small intestine amylase in, I:160 biopsy of, IV:3094–3096 in calcium absorption, III:1697 in cholestasis, II:783 in cutaneous larvae migrans, II:974 enterostomy for, II:1209 food poisoning and, II:1354 in hookworm disease, III:1667 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2085–2086 in nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 with necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2328 in obesity surgery, IV:2379–2380 perforated from small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 in ulcerative colitis, V:3429 Small round-structured viruses. See Norwalk virus Smallpox, IV:3076, IV:3096–3098, 3097 Smallpox vaccine for monkeypox, III:2212, 2213 for smallpox, IV:3096, 3097 Smallpox virus, III:2212 Smell with aging, I:69 distortion of (See Dysosmia) hallucinations as, III:1503, 1504 3903 Smell with non-melanoma skin cancer, IV:3066 with rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 with septic shock, IV:3005 from sporotrichosis, IV:3143 Skull histiocytosis X and, III:1638 in hypophysectomy, III:1745 in manipulation, IV:2422 in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 sounds through, I:414 Skull defects congenital brain defects from, II:890 Skull fractures, III:1520 head injuries from, III:1520 meningitis from, III:2154 perforated eardrum from, IV:2534 from subdural hematoma, IV:3205 surgery for, III:1522 Skull surgery. See Craniotomy Skull x ray, IV:3058, IV:3081–3083, 3082 Skullcap for alcoholism, I:98 for headache, III:1524 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for PMS, IV:2711 for sleep disorders, IV:3092 for tension headache, V:3255 Slapped cheek disease. See Erythema infectiosum SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus Sledgehammer smallpox, IV:3097 Sleep, III:1843 bed-wetting and, I:454 blood pressure and, III:1752 heart activity during ambulatory electrocardiography for, III:1653 hyperemesis gravidarum and, III:1703 from hypothermia, III:1754 with interstitial lung diseases, III:1774 positions sudden infant death syndrome from, IV:3213, 3214, 3215 for postpartum depression prevention, IV:2682 REM (See REM sleep) with restless legs syndrome, IV:2869 for syphilis, IV:3230 Sleep apnea, IV:3083–3086 with anti-insomnia agents, I:284 bed-wetting from, I:454 with benzodiazepines, I:467 choking from, II:772 CPAP for, III:1837, 1838, 1839, 1841 from deviated septum, II:1045 from Marfan syndrome, III:2116 from muscular dystrophy, III:2264 from obesity, IV:2997, 3000 Smell loss of (See Anosmia) as migraine trigger, III:2188 with nasal papillomas, IV:2315 with nasal polyps, IV:2315 Smell test, IV:3100 Smelling disorders, IV:2317, IV:3098–3102 Smoke, secondhand. See Secondhand smoke Smoke inhalation, IV:3059, IV:3102–3103 with burns, I:618 recompression treatment for, IV:2826 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 Smoking, IV:3103–3107, 3105t with acetaminophen, I:19 as addiction, I:50 aging and, I:72 allergic rhinitis from, I:112 amenorrhea from, I:147 ammonia levels from, III:2024 with angina pectoris, I:195 anosmia from, I:215, IV:3099, 3100 with antimigraine agents, I:291 with asbestosis, I:369, 370–371 asthma from, I:380, 384 atherosclerosis from, I:394 atrial ectopic beats from, I:406 bad breath from, I:437 bladder cancer from, I:507 with blepharoplasty, I:518 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 brain tumors from, I:574 with breast reconstruction, I:586 bronchitis and, II:809 bronchitis from, I:598, 600 Buerger’s disease from, I:611 with byssinosis, I:622 cancer and, II:632, 637 carcinoembryonic antigen test with, II:654 cataracts from, II:673 catecholamines levels with, II:677 cerebral aneurysm from, II:698 cervical cancer from, II:716 children’s health and, II:766 choking from, II:772 with cholesterol tests, II:792 cleft lip and palate, II:818–819 clubfoot from, II:822 cluster headache from, II:824 CO poisoning and, II:651 colon cancer from, II:849 common cold from, II:869 conduct disorder from, II:883 COPD and, II:809 with coronary heart disease, II:929–930 coronary heart disease and, II:934 cough from, II:941 with cough suppressants, II:943 3904 dysmenorrhea and, II:1118 dyspepsia from, II:1118 elastase and, II:809 emphysema and, II:809 emphysema from, II:1172, 1173, 1174, 1175 with endarterectomy, II:1180 with esophageal atresia, II:1238 esophageal cancer and, II:1240 extrinsic allergic alveolitis and, III:1716 with face lift, II:1276 female sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 with folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 folic acid deficiency anemia from, I:181 foot care and, II:1357 fracture repair and, II:1361 frostbite and, II:1372 gallstones from, III:1388 with gastrostomy, III:1411 gay and lesbian health and, III:1414, 1415, 1416 Goodpasture’s syndrome and, III:1475–1476 with guaifenesin, II:1254 head and neck cancer from, III:1516, 1519 headache from, III:1523 heart attacks from, III:1532 heartburn from, III:1553 with hemoglobin test, III:1576 with hemophilus infections, III:1586 with hemoptysis, III:1589 with high cholesterol, II:794 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 histoplasmosis with, III:1640 hives from, III:1643 hypercholesterolemia and, III:1700 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1708 with hysterectomy, III:1762 impotence from, III:1805 indigestion from, III:1813, 1815 with kidney cancer, III:1909, 1911 lacrimal duct obstruction and, III:1939 laryngeal cancer and, III:1950–1951, 1954 Legionnaires’ disease and, III:1972 with low back pain, III:2031, 2033 lung cancer and, III:2043–2044, 2046–2047, III:2047 lung diseases from, III:2050, 2051 with lung transplantation, III:2054 with macular degeneration, III:2076 Marfan syndrome and, III:2118 men and, III:2165 with menopause, III:2159 mental retardation from, III:2174 miscarriage from, III:2204 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234 with myelography, III:2284 myocardial ischemia from, III:1868, 1871 with Norplant, II:1032 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with occupational asthma, IV:2387 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 osteoporosis and, IV:2428 otitis media and, IV:2433 oxygen therapy and, III:1838, 1840 pancreatic cancer from, IV:2474, 2477 passive (See Secondhand smoke) penile cancer and, IV:2530 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 placenta previa from, IV:2611 placental abruption from, IV:2612 with plastic surgery, IV:2621 pneumonia and, IV:2638 pregnancy and, IV:2697, 2712 premature membrane rupture and, IV:2704, 2705 prematurity and, IV:2701, 2708 pulmonary fibrosis and, IV:2782 recurrent miscarriages and, IV:2836 with sciatica, IV:2965 secondary polycythemia from, IV:2982 senior’s health and, IV:2996, 2998, 3000 with Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 smoke inhalation from, IV:3102 sore throat from, IV:3118 stillbirth from, IV:3163 stomach ulcers from, V:3432 with stroke, IV:3199 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3202, 3204 sudden infant death syndrome from, IV:3213, 3214, 3215 thoracic surgery and, V:3288 with thrombocytosis, V:3297 with TIA, V:3371 tracheotomy and, V:3355 trench mouth from, IV:2547 with vagotomy, V:3470 vocal cord nodules and polyps from, V:3529 vulvar cancer from, V:3536 Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome from, V:3574 women and, V:3576 See also Nicotine Smoking cessation for amenorrhea, III:2172 for anosmia, I:215, IV:3100 for atelectasis, I:391 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 with cor pulmonale, II:917 for coronary heart disease, II:933 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 hemorrhoids and, III:1594 itching from, III:1874 for rosacea, IV:2918 Soccer, III:2135 Social behavior in addiction, I:51 with ADHD, I:410, 413 with bed-wetting, I:454 children’s health and, II:763, 764 FUO and, II:1318 with urinary incontinence, V:3455 Social discrimination, I:91 Social disorders with autism, I:418 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 from hypoglycemia, III:1735 as malingering, III:2100 with mental retardation, III:2174 from pervasive developmental disorder, IV:2568 Social phobia, I:322–323, IV:2581–2583 vs. anorexia nervosa, I:212 antianxiety drugs for, I:231 anxiety with, I:319 cognitive therapy for, II:840 mutism as, III:2272 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 Social support for anorexia nervosa, I:212 for mental retardation, III:2173 after salpingo-oophorectomy, IV:2939 self help groups for, III:1485 for sex change surgery, IV:3011 for substance abuse, IV:3211 Socialization, for paraphilias, IV:3019 Socioeconomic class in anorexia nervosa, I:212 COPD and, II:809 insomnia and, III:1843 STDs and, III:1483, IV:3021 Sociopathic personality, III:1485 Socrates, as vegetarian, V:3485 SOD. See Superoxide dismutase Sodium in acute kidney failure, I:45 in aldosterone tests, I:100, 101 from chronic kidney failure, II:806 in cold sores, II:845 deficiency of, III:2190–2193 for dehydration, II:1017 in dehydration, II:1016 depletion muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 in diabetes insipidus, II:1046 in diarrhea, I:265 for drug overdose, II:1106 in edema, II:1134 in electrolyte disorders, II:1153–1154, 1155 electrolyte tests for, II:1157 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 excessive hypernatremia from, III:1709–1710 in healthy diets, III:2105 in heart failure, III:1540 in heat stress disorders, III:1556, 1557 kidney function tests for, III:1913 levels of with ascites, I:372 in metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 in oral rehydration solutions, V:3379 with overhydration, IV:2449 low levels of hyponatremia from, III:1742 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 in malnutrition, III:2105 with Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 in mushroom poisoning, III:2268 in penicillins, IV:2528 retention from kidney transplantation, III:1922 supplements of, III:2195–2197 toxicity, III:2194 Sodium bicarbonate for acidosis, III:2179 as antacid, I:218 with aspirin, I:378 for chickenpox, II:750–751 for cystinuria, II:991 for dermatitis, V:3281 for genital herpes, III:1442 for heartburn, III:1555 with hypernatremia, III:1709 for hyperphosphatemia, IV:2585 in hyponatremia, III:1742 for iron toxicity, III:2194 with local anesthesia, I:190 for skin lesions, IV:3076 with tetracyclines, V:3267 toxicity, III:2194 for urethritis, V:3441 Sodium biphosphate, III:1963 Sodium chloride (Dietary) for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 electrolyte disorders from, II:1155 electrolyte imbalance from, II:1158 fibrocystic condition of the breast and, II:1325 with hypernatremia, III:1709–1710 hyponatremia and, III:1742, 1743 toxicity, III:2194 for vitamin D toxicity, V:3524 Sodium fluoride, for osteoporosis, IV:2427 Sodium-free diet. See Sodium-restricted diet Sodium imbalance, II:1134 3905 Sodium imbalance drugs for (See Smoking cessation drugs) for emphysema, II:1173 with endarterectomy, II:1180, 1182 for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1309 for heart attack prevention, III:1535–1536 for heart failure, III:1540 for high cholesterol, II:789 for hypertension prevention, III:1722, 1723 for low back pain, III:2033 for lung disease prevention, III:2051 for Meniere’s disease, III:2152 for pneumothorax prevention, IV:2642 for premature labor prevention, IV:2701 for renal artery occlusion, IV:2856 for renal artery stenosis, IV:2857 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 for retinopathy prevention, IV:2891 for silicosis, IV:3056 for sleep disorders, IV:3000 for strep throat prevention, IV:3180 for stroke prevention, IV:3198 for tinnitus, V:3323 for vascular dementia, II:1025 for wheezing, V:3555 Smoking cessation drugs, IV:3105, IV:3107–3111, 3108f, 3109 with antimigraine agents, I:291 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 Smooth muscle, I:129 Smothering. See Asphyxia Snail fever. See Schistosomiasis Snails, II:1342 Snake bites. See Bites and stings Snake plantain. See Plantain Snake venoms, I:498, 499 jaundice from, III:1882 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 Snakes, bites from. See Bites and stings Snakeweed. See Plantain Snapping hazel. See Witch hazel Snellen chart for eye examination, II:1262 for neurologic examination, IV:2351 for visual impairment, V:3510 Snoring, IV:3111–3113 bed-wetting from, I:454 from deviated septum, II:1045 insomnia from, III:1843 from obesity, IV:2997, 3000 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 Snowball tree. See Cramp bark Snowblindness, III:1905 Soap dermatitis from, II:1037 for enemas, II:1200 Sodium iodide Sodium iodide, IV:2337 Sodium molecules, I:190 Sodium phosphate with hypernatremia, III:1709 with hyponatremia, III:1742 Sodium polystyrene sulfonate, III:1706 Sodium-restricted diet with Alport’s syndrome, I:132 for amyloidosis, I:162 for aortic valve insufficiency, I:329 for asbestosis, I:370 for ascites, I:372, 373 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 for chronic kidney failure, II:808 for cor pulmonale, II:917 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for dizziness, II:1096 for edema, II:1135 for Fabry’s disease, III:2005 for Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1291 after heart valve replacement, III:1551 for hypertension prevention, III:1722, 1723 hyponatremia from, III:1742, 1743 with penicillins, IV:2528 with plasma renin activity, IV:2617–2618 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 sodium absorption and, III:1709 Sodium salicylate, I:378 Sodium sitogluconate, III:1976 Sodium sulfacetamide, II:903 Sodium sulfate, I:275 Sodium tetradecyl sulfate, IV:2969 Sodium valproate, II:696 Sof-Lax. See Docusate Soft corn. See Corns Soft lenses. See Contact lenses Soft palate in Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 in velopharyngeal insufficiency, V:3489 Soft tissue culture. See Wounds, cultures for Soft tissue diseases. See Connective tissue diseases Soft tissue injuries. See Connective tissue, injuries to Soil coccidioidomycosis from, II:834 cryptococcosis from, II:964 eating (See Geophagia) heavy metal poisoning from, III:1560 histoplasmosis from, III:1639 lead in, III:1965 melioidosis from, III:2150 mycetoma from, III:2275 mycobacterial infections from, III:2276 3906 sporotrichosis from, IV:3143, 3144 Solar retinopathy, IV:2890 Soldering, IV:2386 Soldier’s herb. See Plantain Solganol. See Aurothioglucose Soluble fiber, IV:2367 Solvents delirium from, II:1021, 1022 kidney damage from, IV:2337 in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234 paresthesia from, IV:2365 Soma. See Carisoprodol Somatization disorder. See Somatoform disorders Somatoform disorders, III:1764, IV:3113–3117 vs. anorexia nervosa, I:212 dissociative disorders with, II:1085 with dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 indigestion from, III:1813 palpitations from, IV:2465 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2768 Somatomedin-C. See Insulin-like growth factor Somatosensory evoked potentials, II:1248 for cervical spondylosis, II:721 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 test of for thoracic outlet syndrome, V:3287 Somatostatin analogues, IV:2608 Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, IV:2472 Somatostatinoma, IV:2471 Somatotropin, I:71, III:1488 See also Growth hormones Somatotropin-releasing hormone, I:32–33, III:1748 Somnambulism. See Sleepwalking Somophyllin. See Aminophylline Somophyllin-T. See Theophylline Sonata. See Zaleplon Sonogram. See Ultrasonography Sonograms. See Ultrasonography Sonography. See Ultrasonography Sonohysterography. See Hysterosonography Sorbitol activated charcoal and, I:368, II:732 diarrhea from, II:1066 for IBS, III:1867 lactic acidosis from, III:1945 Sorbitrate. See Isosorbide dinitrate Sore (Skin). See Skin ulcer Sore throat, IV:3117–3120, 3119 adenoid hyperplasia from, I:55 aromatherapy for, I:350 dehydration from, II:1017 with epiglottitis, II:1220 from gastric acid determination, III:1400–1401 from infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 with laryngitis, III:1957 local anesthesia for, I:190 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 T & A for, V:3325 from yersiniosis, V:3592 See also Strep throat; Tonsillitis Sorrel, I:111 Sotalol, III:1534 Sound therapy, IV:3190 Sounds audiometry for, I:414 with cochlear implants, II:838 hallucinations as, III:1503, 1504 in tinnitus, V:3322 Sourdock, IV:2427 South African genetic porphyria. See Variegate porphyria South American blastomycosis, IV:3120–3121 South American hemorrhagic fever. See American hemorrhagic fever South American yellow fever. See Yellow fever Southern blot analysis, II:976 Soy for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 for high cholesterol, II:787 for menopause, III:2162 Space medicine. See Aviation medicine Spagnum moss, IV:3143, 3144 Spagnum moss disease. See Sporotrichosis Sparfloxacin, II:1344–1345 Spasm, III:2260–2261 from acrocyanosis, I:31 in asthma, I:380 benzodiazepines for, I:466 from bites and stings, I:498, 499 cooling treatments for, II:913–914 after CVS, II:800 diathermy heat treatment for, III:1560 from dislocations and subluxations, II:1083 drugs for (See Antispasmodic drugs) from electric shock injuries, II:1143 from exercise, II:1251 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 from herniated disk, III:1628 from HSG, III:1766 from hypocalcemia, II:1158, III:1732 from hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 immobilization and, III:1780 with jaw dislocations, III:2136 from lactic acid, III:1944 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Speech articulation, III:1956, IV:3123, 3124 Speech assesment, IV:2351 Speech audiometry, I:29, 414 Speech development, IV:3199 Speech disfluency, IV:3199 Speech disorders, IV:3121–3125 from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 from CNS infections, II:690 from dronabinol, II:645 from endarterectomy, II:1182 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 from Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 from head and neck cancer, III:1518 from hypothermia, III:1754 from leishmaniasis, III:1975 from liver encephalopathy, III:2023 from malocclusion, III:2106 from Meniere’s disease, III:2152 mental status examination for, III:2177, 2178 from otitis media, IV:2434 with paralysis, IV:2492 from peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 from progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 with psychosis, IV:2766 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 stuttering, IV:3199–3200 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3203 from TIA, V:3371 from velopharyngeal insufficiency, V:3490 See also Mutism Speech impairment. See Speech disorders Speech in noise discrimination testing, I:417 Speech pathology. See Speech therapy Speech processor, II:839 Speech therapy, IV:2846, 2847 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 for aphasia, I:335 for ataxia, I:388 for developmental delays, II:765 for hearing loss, I:414 with polymyositis, IV:2667 for PSP, IV:2722 for shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 for speech disorders, IV:3123–3125 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 for stuttering, IV:3199, 3200 after tracheotomy, V:3354 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for velopharyngeal insufficiency, V:3490 for vocal cord nodules and polyps, V:3529 SPEP. See Blood protein electrophoresis Sperm in birth control, IV:2401 in contraception, II:911 count in infertility, III:1832 with epididymitis, II:1218 with IUDs, III:1876 semen analysis for, IV:2995 in in vitro fertilization, III:1808–1809 Sperm banking, V:3258 Sperm count, III:1826 Sperm granulomas, V:3482 Sperm motility in infertility, III:1832 infertility and, III:1826 semen analysis for, IV:2995 Spermatic cord, III:1626 Spermatocidal agents, II:911 with condoms, II:882 with diaphragms, II:1064 for STD prevention, IV:3023 with vulvovaginitis, V:3540 Spermatogenesis, IV:3013 Spermicides. See Spermatocidal agents Spherocytic hemolytic anemia. See Hereditary spherocytosis Spherocytosis jaundice from, III:1882 splenectomy for, IV:3138 Sphincter contraction, I:558 Sphincterotomy, II:776 Sphincters fecal incontinence from, II:1301 in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 rectal prolapse from, IV:2835 in spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 Sphingomyelinase, III:2004 Sphygmomanometer, III:1753 Spider angiomas, I:494, 496 Spider bites. See Bites and stings Spider-burst veins, V:3476 Spider nevus. See Spider angiomas Spider veins. See Spider angiomas Spider venoms, III:1882 Spiders arbovirus encephalitis from, I:347 bites from (See Bites and stings) Spikenard. See Valerian Spilanthes, III:2060 Spina bifida, II:890, IV:3125–3128, 3126 alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 antenatal tests for, I:220 genetic/environmental causes, I:492 from radiation, I:490 3907 Spina bifida laryngeal from hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 with low back pain, III:2032 from malnutrition, III:2104 from miscarriage, III:2204 in multiple sclerosis, III:2250–2251, 2253 muscle from toxoplasmosis, V:3349 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2006 osteopathy for, IV:2422 pain from, IV:2459 in sciatica, IV:2963 from tetanus, V:3264, 3265 traction for, V:3357 Spasmodic croup. See Croup Spasmodic torticollis. See Torticollis Spasmus nutans, IV:2371 Spastic bladder. See Neurogenic bladder Spastic bowel. See Irritable bowel syndrome Spastic colitis. See Irritable bowel syndrome Spastic colon. See Irritable bowel syndrome Spastic eyelid muscle, II:1271 Spastic paraplegia, IV:2394 Spasticity botulinum toxin injections for, I:558 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 from congenital brain defects, II:891 electromyography for, II:1159 muscle relaxants for, III:2258–2259 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3129 with spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 SPCA deficiency. See Hemophilia Special education for adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 for Down syndrome, II:1100 for dyslexia, II:1116 for learning disorders, III:1969 for mental retardation, III:2173 for shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 Specific gravity, V:3445 Specific phobias. See Phobias Specifics (Herbal medicine), III:1619 SPECT. See Single photon emission computed tomography Spectazole Cream. See Econazole; Topical antifungal drugs Spectinomycin for chancroid, II:730 for gonorrhea, III:1473 Spectrophotometry, III:1576 Spectroscopy, III:1705 Speculum in endometrial biopsy, II:1186 in otoscopy, II:1121 Spina bifida stillbirth from, IV:3163 Spinal adjustment. See Spinal manipulative therapy Spinal anesthesia, I:190 for appendectomy, I:338 for childbirth, II:760 Spinal block, I:190 Spinal canal in achondroplasia, I:22 stenosis of, IV:3136–3137 x-rays of, III:2283–2284 Spinal cancer, III:2031 Spinal concussion, IV:3129 Spinal contusion, IV:3128 Spinal cord abnormalities of arteriovenous malformations, I:357 in cervical spondylosis, II:719 CNS infections, II:690 in congenital brain defects, II:890 damage to reflex tests and, IV:2841 in Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369 with herniated disk, III:1628 in hiccups, III:1631 in Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 in movement disorders, III:2221 in multiple sclerosis, III:2249–2250 in muscle spasms and cramps, III:2260 in pain, IV:2459 in paresthesia, IV:2365 reflex tests and, IV:2841 in sciatica, IV:2963, 2964 in scoliosis, IV:2972 Spinal cord abnormalities, I:494 Spinal cord abscess from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 sexual dysfunctions from, IV:3016 Spinal cord compression, IV:3128 from multiple myeloma, III:2240 myelography for, III:2283–2284 Spinal cord diseases from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 MRI for, III:2082 vs. musculoskeletal disease, IV:2422 from tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3395 Spinal cord injuries, IV:3128–3132, 3130f bed-wetting from, I:454 cell therapy for, II:686 with chest physical therapy, II:745 contracture from, II:913, 914 cystometry for, II:995 with decubitus ulcer, I:457 electric brain stimulation for, II:1146 from electric shock, II:1143 electromyography for, II:1255 erection disorders from, IV:3051 3908 hypothermia from, III:1754 impotence from, IV:2531 movement disorders from, III:2221 muscle relaxants and, III:2258, 2259 muscle spasms and cramps of, III:2260 near drowning from, IV:2327 neurogenic bladder from, IV:2347 orthostatic hypotension from, IV:2411 paralysis from, IV:2492 priapism from, IV:2715 rehabilitation for, IV:2846, 2847 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 Shy-Drager syndrome from, IV:3038 sphincter electromyography for, II:1255 with urethritis, V:3440 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 wilderness medicine for, V:3562 Spinal cord lesion, IV:2352 Spinal cord tumors, IV:3132–3133 chemonucleolysis and, II:739 myelography for, III:2284 papilledema from, IV:2488 surgery for bed-wetting, I:454 Spinal curvatures in achondroplasia, I:22 scoliosis, IV:2970–2973 Spinal fluid. See Cerebrospinal fluid Spinal fusion, IV:2410 bone grafts and, I:544 with disk removal, II:1081 for herniated disk, III:1630 from kyphosis, III:1932 for scoliosis, IV:2972 spinal instrumentation after, IV:3134 Spinal headache, I:191 Spinal instrumentation, IV:3133–3136 Spinal manipulation, IV:2422–2423 Spinal manipulative therapy, II:767–770 See also Chiropractic Spinal muscular atrophy electromyography for, II:1160 vs. muscular dystrophy, III:2265 scoliosis with, IV:2972 Spinal nerve roots electromyography for, II:1159 sciatica from, IV:2963 in spinal stenosis, IV:3136 in whiplash, V:3555 Spinal stenosis, IV:3136–3137 from cervical spondylosis, II:720 low back pain from, III:2032 myelography for, III:2284 Spinal tap. See Lumbar puncture Spine abnormalities of kyphosis, III:1931–1932 myelography for, III:2283–2284 scoliosis (See Scoliosis) spinal instrumentation for, IV:3133–3134 in achondroplasia, I:22 alignment of spinal instrumentation for, IV:3134 bone biopsy for, I:539 cervical vertebrae (See Cervical vertebrae) dislocations and subluxations chiropractic for, II:1084 with herniated disk, III:1627 injuries of coccyx (See Coccyx, injuries to) surgery for, IV:2410 with juvenile arthritis, III:1893 MRI imaging of, III:2082 in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 in osteochondrosis, IV:2416 in spinal cord injuries, IV:3128 Spineboards, V:3562 Spinocerebellar ataxia, III:2221 Spinocerebellar disorders, IV:2394 Spiral computed tomography scan. See Computed tomography scan Spiral fractures. See Fracture lines Spiramycin, for toxoplasmosis, V:3349 Spirillum minus, IV:2822 Spiritualism, IV:2686 Spirometry for ABPA, I:108 for asthma, I:381 for atelectasis, I:391 for COPD, II:810 for emphysema, II:1173 incentive, III:1838–1841 tests for, IV:2783–2784 Spironolactone for acne, I:26 for amenorrhea, I:147 cortisol test with, II:937 gynecomastia from, III:1497 for heart attacks, III:1534 for hirsutism, III:1637 for hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 hyperkalemia from, III:1705 hypogonadism from, III:1738 in hypokalemia, III:1739 for PCOS, IV:2655 Spirulina, V:3487 Spleen acid phosphatase in, I:23 in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 aspartate aminotransferase in, I:374 CAT scan of, II:875 enlarged (See Splenomegaly) injuries of (See Splenic trauma) in mastocytosis, III:2132 punctured from kidney biopsy, III:1908 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 from infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 jaundice from, III:1882 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from leishmaniasis, III:1975 from liver cancer, III:2019 from myelofibrosis, III:2282 from Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004 from pancreatectomy, IV:2469 from paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 polycythemia vera and, IV:2658, 2660 rupture of, IV:3141 from erythroblastosis fetalis, II:1230 from infectious mononucleosis, III:1824 from schistosomiasis, IV:2954 from secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 from sideroblastic anemia, IV:3048 splenectomy for, IV:3138 from thalassemia, III:1578 from TORCH syndrome, V:3338 from typhoid, V:3421 from typhus, V:3423 from Wolman disease, III:2005 Splenoportography, I:198–199 Splenorenal shunt. See Portal vein bypass Splints for carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668, 669 for Charcot’s joints, II:736 for clenched fist injury, II:821 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 for contractures, II:914 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for fingertip injuries, II:1333 for fracture repair, II:1361 for fractures, II:1365 for frostbite, II:1371 for immobilization, III:1780–1781 for infectious arthritis, III:1821 for leprosy, III:1979 for mallet finger, III:2102 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 with septoplasty, IV:3006 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 for tendinitis, V:3251 for tennis elbow, V:3252 for TMJ, V:3250 Split brain. See Schizencephaly Split personality. See Dissociative identity disorder Spock, Dr. Benjamin, II:763 Spondylitis with Crohn’s disease, II:957 with ulcerative colitis, V:3430 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Spondyloarthropathy. See Juvenile arthritis Spondylolisthesis from Marfan syndrome, III:2115, 2117 spinal stenosis from, IV:3137 Spondylosis cervical, II:719–722 paralysis from, IV:2491 from scoliosis, IV:2970, 2973 Spongia for laryngitis, III:1958 Spongiform degeneration. See Spongiform encephalopathy Spongiform encephalopathy Bovine (See Bovine spongiform encephalopathy) Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease as, II:950 Spontaneous abortion. See Miscarriage Spontaneous fractures, IV:2455 Spontaneous Pneumothorax. See Pneumothorax Spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage. See Subarachnoid hemorrhage Sporadic acoustic neuroma. See Acoustic neuroma Sporadic ALS. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Sporadic Alzheimer’s disease. See Alzheimer’s disease Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Sporadic encephalitis. See Encephalitis Sporadic inheritance pseudoxanthoma elasticum, IV:2753 Sporanox. See Itraconazole Spores from anthrax, I:223 from aspergillosis, I:375 from clostridia, I:560, II:1355 Sporothrix schenckii, IV:3142 Sporotrichosis, IV:3142–3144, 3143f Sports amenorrhea from, I:146 athletic heart syndrome from, I:400 ganglion from, III:1392 heel spurs from, III:1562 with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 injuries from (See Sports injuries) radial keratotomy and, IV:2804 spinal cord injuries from, IV:3128 vision training for, V:3508 whiplash from, V:3555 wounds from, V:3581 Sports injuries, IV:3144–3147, 3145 arthroscopy for, I:364 concussion from, II:878 dental trauma from, II:1029 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 to fingertip, II:1333 3909 Sports injuries role of, III:1643 sickle cell disease and, IV:3042 situs inversus of, IV:3060 Spleen cancer. See Splenic cancer Spleen palpation, III:1719 Splenectomy, IV:3137–3141, 3138f babesiosis after, I:433, 434 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 with gastrectomy, III:1397 with glycosylated hemoglobin test, III:1469 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1503 for hemolytic anemia, I:183, III:1580 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1645–1646 for hypersplenism, III:1719 for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 for jaundice, III:1884 meningitis and, III:2154, 2156 for myelofibrosis, III:2283 for neutropenia, IV:2354 with pyruvate kinase deficiency, IV:2795 with salmonella poisoning, IV:2935 for splenic trauma, IV:3142 Splenic cancer, IV:3138 Splenic diseases from histoplasmosis, III:1640 with mycobacterial infections, III:2277 from pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 from staphylococcal infections, IV:3158 ultrasonography for, I:2 Splenic embolization, IV:3140 Splenic irradiation, I:424 Splenic rupture from endocarditis, II:1183 from trauma, IV:3141 Splenic sequestration, IV:3042–3043 Splenic subcapsular hematomas. See Splenic trauma Splenic trauma, IV:3141–3142 Splenomegalic polycythemia. See Polycythemia vera Splenomegaly from acute leukemia, III:1987 from cholestasis, II:785 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 from cytomegalovirus infections, II:1000 from dengue fever, II:1028 from falciparum malaria, III:2090 with G6PD, III:1464 from Gaucher’s disease, III:2004 from hairy cell leukemia, III:1501, 1502 from hemolytic anemia, III:1579 from histiocytosis, III:1639 vs. hypersplenism, III:1718 Sports injuries fractures, II:1363 head, III:1519 jaw fixation for, III:1885 mallet finger from, III:2101–2102 maxillofacial, III:2135–2138 in men, III:2165 nail removal for, IV:2309 nasal trauma from, IV:2317 orthopedic surgery for, IV:2410 osteoarthritis from, IV:2412 pelvic fractures, IV:2520 rolfing for, IV:2912 rotator cuff, IV:2920–2921 sprains and strains, IV:3147 Sports massage, III:2126 Sports medicine massage. See Massage Spotted alder. See Witch hazel Spotted cranesbill, II:1114 Spotting, vaginal. See Uterine hemorrhage Sprafloxacin, I:258 Sprains and strains, IV:3147–3148 cooling treatments for, II:914–915 from exercise, II:1251 fasciotomy for, II:1292 ganglion from, III:1392 hyperkalemia from, III:1705 low back pain from, III:2031 muscle relaxants and, III:2259 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 orthopedics and, IV:2410 sports-related, IV:3145 ultrasonography for, I:2 Spranayama, V:3595 See also Breathing exercises Spreng. See Bearberry Sprue. See Celiac disease Spurious polycythemia, IV:2982 Sputum analysis, III:2044, 2048 Sputum culture, IV:3036, IV:3148–3151 for ABPA, I:108 from adenoviruses, I:57 for aspergillosis, I:375 for blastomycosis, I:513 for bronchiectasis, I:597 for bronchitis, I:598–599 for cancer, II:634 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cough, II:942 for cross infection, III:1675 for cryptococcosis, II:965 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for hemoptysis, III:1589 for histoplamsosis, III:1640 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1973 for melioidosis, III:2151 for mycobacterial infections, III:2277 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 3910 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 for pneumonia, IV:2640 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 for smoke inhalation, IV:3102 for South American blastomycosis, IV:3121 before thoracic surgery, V:3288 for tuberculosis, V:3403 Sputum cytology. See Sputum culture Squamous cell cancer cryotherapy for, II:962 ear surgery for, II:1124 laryngeal, III:1950 parotid cancer from, IV:2504 Squamous cell carcinoma, II:632 anal cancer from, I:170 esophageal, II:1239, 1240 lung, III:2043 non-melanoma skin cancer as, IV:3066–3068 skin lesions from, IV:3075 See also Cancer Squamous intraepithelial lesion, IV:2486–2487 Squamous intraepithelial lesions. See Cervical dysplasia Squaw root. See Blue cohosh Squaw tea. See Ephedra Squeeze technique, IV:2700, 3014, 3016 Squint. See Strabismus Squirrels monkeypox from, III:2212 plague and, IV:2614 rat-bite fever from, IV:2822 SR, on kidney transplantation, III:1921 SRSVs. See Norwalk virus SSRIs. See Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors SSW testing, I:417 St. John’s wort, I:257, IV:3151–3153, 3151 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:140 for burns, I:619 for depression, II:1035 drug interactions with, II:1102 for insomnia, III:1845 for mood disorders, III:2217 for obsessive-compulsive disorder, IV:2382 for otitis media, IV:2435 for PMS, IV:2711 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 St. Louis encephalitis, I:347, II:1178 St. Mary thistle. See Milk thistle St. Vitus’ dance. See Sydenham’s chorea ST segment exercise test and, IV:3192 Staggered sporadic word testing, I:417 Staghorn stones, III:1918 Staging. See Cancer staging Stagnant anoxia, I:216 Standard precautions. See Universal precautions Standing, II:924 Stanford-Binet intelligence scale, III:2175, IV:2764, IV:3153–3154 Stapedectomy, II:1123, IV:2436, IV:3154–3156, 3155 Stapes in mastoidectomy, III:2133 removal of, IV:3154 surgery of, II:1122 Staph infections. See Staphylococcal infections Staphylococcal infections, IV:3156–3160, 3157, 3158 from animal bites, I:206 from body piercing, IV:2599 cephalosporins for, II:692 from clenched fist injury, II:821 from furunculosis, I:536 stye from, II:1271 toxic shock syndrome from, V:3346 Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, IV:3160–3161 Staphylococcus acute lymphangitis from, I:47 bacteremia from, I:436 conjunctivitis from, II:903 folliculitis from, II:1351 gangrene from, III:1393 human bite infections from, III:1677 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 skin culture for, IV:3068 toxic shock syndrome from, IV:3005 Staphylococcus aureus abscess from, I:13 from animal bites, I:206 cellulitis from, II:684 in clenched fist injury, II:821 cultures for, V:3579 empyema from, II:1175 food poisoning from, II:1353, 1354 with furunculosis, I:536 impetigo from, III:1801 infections from, IV:3157 infectious arthritis from, III:1819–1820 mastitis from, III:2131, 2132 mastoiditis from, III:2134 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 osteomyelitis from, IV:2420 in pericardial fluid, IV:2537 staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome from, IV:3160 toxic shock syndrome from, V:3347 Staphylococcus epidermidis GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for testicular cancer, V:3259 Stem cells in acute leukemia, III:1987 in chronic leukemia, III:1990 in myelodysplastic syndrome, III:2279 Stents in angioplasty, I:202 for coronary heart disease, II:932, 934–935 with endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1198 with esophageal cancer, II:1241 with gallbladder cancer, III:1380 during lithotripsy, III:2016 x-rays of, III:1923 Stereotactic biopsy, I:567–568 Stereotactic magnetic resonance imaging, IV:2770 Stereotactic needle biopsy, II:1324 Stereotactic radiation therapy, I:30 Stereotactic radiosurgery. See Radiosurgery Stereotactic x-ray of the breast, I:576 for hypophysectomy, III:1745 Sterile abscess. See Abscess Sterility. See Infertility Sterilization for cross infection, III:1675 for piercing and tattoos, IV:2599 Steriod creams, II:1063 Sterman, Barry, I:483 Sternocleidomastoid, IV:2352 Sternum in costrochondritis, II:940 injuries to chest x-ray for, II:749 Steroids, IV:2374 for ABPA, I:376 ACE test and, I:205 with aldosterone test, I:101 amenorrhea from, I:146 anabolic (See Anabolic steroids) for aplastic anemia, I:337 for arborvirus encephalitis, I:347 with aspirin, I:379 for asthma, I:381–382, 383, 601 for atopic dermatitis, I:404 for autoimmune diseases, I:424 vs. barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 for bites and stings, I:503 for brain abscess, I:567 before brain surgery, I:572 for brain tumors, I:572, 573 for bunions, I:616 for carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668 cataracts from, II:675 for celiac disease, II:683 with cellulitis, II:684 for cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for cervical disk disease, II:719 for chemotherapy, II:740 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 for conjunctivitis, II:903 after corneal transplant, II:920 cortisol test with, II:937 for Crohn’s disease, II:958, 959 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1093 edema from, II:1134 for emphysema, II:1173–1174 for face lift, II:1276 for facial paralysis, I:462–463, 463 for ganglion, III:1392 with glaucoma, III:1461 for hemolytic anemia, III:1580 for herniated disk, III:1628 for histiocytosis, III:1639 for hypercalcemia, III:1698 for hypopituitarism, III:1749 with hysterectomy, III:1762 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788, 1789 for infertility, III:1829 for interstitial lung diseases, III:1572, 1774, 1775 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for keloids, III:1903 for lichen planus, III:1997 for lichen simplex chronicus, IV:3078 for meningitis, III:2156 menorrhagia from, II:1112 metabolic alkalosis from, III:2180 mifepristone and, III:2186 for nasal trauma, IV:2318 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2336 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 for palliative cancer therapy, II:642 parathyroid hormone test and, IV:2495 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2553 for pityriasis rosea, IV:2610 plasma renin activity and, IV:2617 postmenopausal bleeding and, IV:2680 for premature labor, IV:2330 for premature membrane rupture, IV:2705 for prematurity, IV:2708 after PRK, IV:2587 for prostatitis, IV:2741 protein components test and, IV:2745 psoriasis and, IV:2756 psychosis from, IV:2766 for pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 for respiratory acidosis, IV:2861 for respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 3911 Steroids infections from, IV:3157 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 otitis externa from, IV:2431 Staphylococcus saprophyticus cystitis from, II:992 infections from, IV:3157 Starch for shingles, IV:3032 Starch, eating. See Amylophagia Starfruit, III:1918 Startle reaction, IV:2686 Starvation, IV:3161–3162 acidosis from, III:2179 from anorexia nervosa, I:211 with cholesterol tests, II:792 general adaptation syndrome with, III:1425 hypokalemia from, III:1740 jaundice from, III:1883 magnesium deficiency from, III:2078 in Munchausen syndrome, III:2257 protein components test and, IV:2746 triiodothyronine levels and, V:3312 urinalysis for, V:3445 vitamin B6 deficiency from, V:3514 Starweed. See Chickweed Starwort. See Chickweed Stasis dermatitis. See Dermatitis Static encephalopathy. See Cerebral palsy Static training, I:400 Statins. See HMG-CoA inhibitors Status asthmaticus, I:380 Status epilepticus from alcohol withdrawal, I:93 seizures from, IV:2986 Staub, Anne-Marie, I:277 Stavudine, for AIDS, I:80, 303 STD Information Center, V:3548 STDs. See Sexually transmitted diseases Stealing, in conduct disorder, II:882, 883 Steam aromatherapy, I:349–350 Steam inhalation, III:1691–1692 Steam tent, V:3554 Steatorrhea. See Celiac disease Steatosis. See Fatty liver Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome. See Progressive supranuclear palsy Stein-Leventhal syndrome. See Polycystic ovary syndrome Steinert’s disease. See Myotonic dystrophy Stellaria. See Chickweed Stellaria media. See Chickweed Stem cell transplantation for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647 Streptococcus pyogenes for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 for sarcoidosis, IV:2941 for sciatica, IV:2964 with Sjögren’s syndrome, IV:3064 after skin resurfacing, IV:3080 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for spinal cord tumors, IV:3133 with streptococcal antibody tests, IV:3180 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3233 TB tests and, V:3403 thyroid function tests and, V:3309 with thyroid tests, V:3309 for thyroiditis, V:3319, 3320 for ulcerative colitis, V:3431 for uveitis, V:3462 for vasculitis, V:3480 See also Corticosteroids Stevens-Johnson syndrome, II:1226 from azithromycin, I:242 vs. Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 from sulfonamides, IV:3216 vs. toxic epidermal necrolysis, V:3345 See also Erythema multiforme Stiffness from exercise, II:1251 from fibromyalgia, II:1326 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 from reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2840 Still disease. See Juvenile arthritis Stillbirth, IV:3162–3164 from calcium channel blockers, II:628 electronic fetal monitoring for, II:1161 from fifth disease, II:1329 with gestational diabetes, III:1447 in high risk pregnancy, III:1633 from listeriosis, III:2012, 2014 from malaria, III:2090 malaria and, I:287 from rubella, IV:2927, 2928 from syphilis, IV:2541 from toxoplasmosis, V:3349 Stimate. See Desmopressin Stimulant laxatives, III:1963–1964 Stimulants abuse of by gays and lesbians, III:1416 for autism, I:420 central nervous system (See Central nervous system stimulants) with electroencephalography, II:1152 with fibromyalgia, II:1327 night terrors from, IV:2356 paroxysmal atrial tachycardia from, IV:2505 substance abuse and, IV:3206 3912 Stingers, IV:2552 Stinging nettle. See Nettle Stingray venom. See Venoms Stingrays stings from (See Bites and stings) Stings. See Bites and stings Stinking rose. See Garlic Stitches. See Sutures Stitchwort. See Chickweed Stokes-Adams syndrome, II:1280 Stoma with colostomy, II:863 cystectomy and, II:983 from enterostomy, II:1209 from head and neck cancer, III:1517 with laryngectomy, III:1955, 1956 necrosis, II:863 prolapse, II:863 retraction, II:863 stenosis, II:863 urinary diversion and, V:3453 Stomach abnormalities of gastrostomy for, III:1410 bleeding from Mallory-Weiss syndrome, III:2102–2103 blockage of with dicyclomine, I:309 gastrostomy for, III:1410 distended from colic, II:847 with duodenal obstruction, II:1110 enterostomy with, II:1209 hemorrhage from steroids, I:382 in nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 plastic surgery for, IV:2621 pumping out (See Nasogastric suction) rupture of from anorexia nervosa, I:212 peritonitis from, IV:2556 suction of for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 tube compression of, V:3399–3400 tumors of gastrostomy for, III:1410 from Helicobacter pylori, III:1567 from Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 MALT lymphoid, III:2108–2109 Stomach acid. See Gastric acid Stomach biopsy, III:1406 Stomach cancer, IV:3164–3168, 3165 carcinoembryonic antigen test for, II:654 fibrinogen test and, II:1320 FOBT for, II:1302, 1303 gastrectomy for, III:1397 gastric acid stimulation test for, III:1400 from Helicobacter pylori, III:1567 indigestion from, III:1813, 1815 laparoscopy for, III:1948 liver cancer from, III:2019 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 pernicious anemia and, IV:2559 pernicious anemia from, I:181 tube compression for, V:3399 Stomach diseases antimalarials and, I:287 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 with cephalosporins, II:694 gastric emptying scan for, III:1401 with NSAIDs, IV:2361, 2362 with penicillins, IV:2528 from peritonitis, IV:2489 Stomach flu. See Gastroenteritis Stomach flushing. See Gastric lavage Stomach gas, I:271 Stomach irritation from aspirin, I:19, 378 Stomach polyps, III:1850 Stomach pump. See Gastric lavage Stomach surgery for obesity, IV:2378–2380 pernicious anemia from, IV:2558 Stomach ulcer, V:3431–3435 amylase tests for, I:160 with anticancer agents, I:248 with antidiarrhea drugs, I:265 from aspirin, I:378 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:790 cholinergic agents with, II:794–795 drugs for, I:313–314 dyspepsia from, II:1118 gastrectomy for, III:1398 with gout drugs, III:1480 with Helicobacter pylori, III:1566–1568 vs. hemoptysis, III:1589 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1714 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 nausea from, IV:2325 from nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, IV:2414 pyloroplasty for, IV:2792 with sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 vagotomy for, V:3470 Stomatitis, IV:3170–3171, 3171 Aphthous (See Canker sores) from brachytherapy, IV:2815 dehydration from, II:1017 Stone, Randolph, IV:2646 Stone bruise. See Plantar fasciitis Stool culture, IV:3171–3173 for adenoviruses, I:57 for AIDS, I:80 for botulism, I:561 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 botulinum toxin injections for, I:558 from exophthalmos, II:1252 eye muscle surgery for, II:1269 retinoblastoma and, IV:2883 vision training for, V:3507 See also Esotropia; Exotropia Straight-leg-raising test, IV:2964 Strains. See Sprains and strains Strangulated hernia. See Hernia Strangulating obstruction, III:1848 Strangulation, II:772 Strawberry marks. See Capillary hemangioma Strawberry tongue, IV:2952 Street drugs birth defects from, I:490 with breastfeeding, III:1943 cocaine, II:831–834 with coronary heart disease, II:933 miscarriage from, III:2204 with regional anesthetics, I:191, 193 sildenafil citrate as, IV:3054 Streissguth, Ann, II:1310, 1311 Strengthening exercise. See Exercise Strep infections. See Streptococcal infections Strep throat, IV:3118, 3119, 3120, IV:3177–3180, 3178 adenoid hyperplasia from, I:55 cellulitis from, II:684 cephalosporins for, II:692 with erysipelas, II:1225 erythromycins for, II:1232 mitral valve insufficiency from, III:2206, 2207 in mitral valve stenosis, III:2209, 2210 nephritis from, IV:2334 obsessive-compulsive disorder and, IV:2381 penicillin for, IV:2527 rheumatic fever after, IV:2897–2899 rheumatic fever and, IV:3223 vs. scarlet fever, IV:2952 streptococcal antibody tests for, IV:3180 from streptococcus pyogenes, V:3327 T & A for, V:3325 throat cultures for, V:3293–3295 Streptase. See Streptokinase Streptobacillus moniliformis rat-bite fever from, IV:2822 Streptococcal antibody tests, IV:3180–3182 Streptococcal infections, IV:3182–3185, 3183 from animal bites, I:206 antibody tests for, IV:3180–3182 from body piercing, IV:2599 from clenched fist injury, II:821 elephantiasis from, II:1166 with erysipelas, II:1225 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 erythromycins for, II:1232 flesh-eating disease from, II:1337 glomerulonephritis from, III:1461–1462, 1463 penicillin for, IV:2528 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 toxic shock syndrome from, V:3347 See also Pneumococcal pneumonia; Strep throat Streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin, IV:2951 Streptococcus, IV:2897–2899 animal bite infections from, I:206 bacteremia from, I:436 brain abscess from, I:566 conjunctivitis from, II:903 cultures for, V:3579 vs. streptococcal antibody tests, IV:3180 for Sydenham’s chorea, IV:3223 epiglottitis from, II:1220 gangrene from, III:1393 human bite infections from, III:1677 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 otitis externa from, IV:2431 rheumatic fever from, IV:3223 Streptococcus agalactiae, I:220, IV:3183 newborn meningitis from, III:2154 perinatal infection from, IV:2541–2543 Streptococcus faecium, I:239–240 Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia from from typhoid, V:3422 Streptococcus pneumoniae empyema from, II:1175 mastoiditis from, III:2134 meningitis from, III:2154 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 otitis media from, IV:2433 pneumococcal pneumonia from, IV:2633, 2634 sickle cell disease and, IV:3042 Streptococcus pyogenes, IV:3183 Streptococcus pyogenes, V:3327, 3328 Streptococcus pyogenes acute lymphangitis from, I:47 antibody tests for, IV:3180–3182 cellulitis from, II:684 in clenched fist injury, II:821 erysipelas from, II:1225 flesh-eating disease from, II:1336 gangrene from, III:1393 impetigo from, III:1801 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 laryngitis from, III:1957 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 scarlet fever from, IV:2951 skin culture for, IV:3068 sore throat from, IV:3118 Sydenham’s chorea from, IV:3223 throat cultures and, V:3293–3295 3913 Streptococcus pyogenes for cancer, II:634 for Crohn’s disease, II:958 for E. coli, II:1236 for escherichia coli, III:1581 for FOBT, II:1302–1303 for food poisoning, II:1355 for poliovirus, IV:2649 for splenic trauma, IV:3141 for stool fat test, IV:3173 Stool fats, test for, IV:3173–3174 Stool O and P test. See Stool ova and parasites test Stool ova and parasites test, IV:3174–3175 Stool softeners, III:1964 in bowel training, I:565 with epididymitis, II:1219 for hemorrhoids and anal fissures, I:210–211 after hernia repair, III:1627 for vagotomy patients, V:3470 Stool specimen analysis for amebiasis, I:144 for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239 for balantidiasis, I:441 for constipation, II:906 for cutaneous larvae migrans, II:974 for cyclosporiasis, II:981–982 for diarrhea, II:1066 for enterobacteriaceae, II:1205–1206 for fecal fat, IV:3095 for fluke infection, II:1343 for food poisoning, II:1355 for giardia, III:1451 for hepatitis E, III:1608 for hookworm disease, III:1668 for IBS, III:1866 for intestinal polyps, III:1851 for itching, III:1875 for lactose intolerance, III:1945, 1946 for listeriosis, III:2013 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2087, IV:3173 for menstrual disorders, III:2170 for proctitis, IV:2719 for rotaviruses, IV:2922 for roundworm infections, IV:2924 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for schistosomiasis, IV:2955 for tapeworm disease, V:3240 for travelers diarrhea, V:3379 for ulcerative colitis, V:3430 for vibriosis, V:3507 for yersiniosis, V:3593 See also Stool culture Stories the Feet Can Tell, IV:2842 Stork bite. See Nevus simplex Stoxil. See Idoxuridine Strabismus, IV:3175–3177, 3176 from albinism, I:90, 91 amblyopia from, I:141 Streptococcus pyogenes toxic shock syndrome from, V:3347 Streptococcus viridans, III:1819 Streptokinase for embolism, II:1171 with fibrinogen test, II:1320 for heart attacks, III:1534 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 for renal vein thrombosis, IV:2859 for retinal vein occlusion, IV:2879 serum sickness from, IV:3008 in streptococcal antibody tests, IV:3182 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3298, 3299 Streptolysin O, IV:3180–3181 Streptomyces, I:241 Streptomycin, I:150, 151 anaphylaxis from, I:179 for brucellosis, I:606 for granuloma inguinale, III:1483–1484 hearing loss from, III:1528 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 for mycobacterial infections, III:2277 for plague, IV:2616 for tuberculosis, V:3409 for tularemia, V:3411 Streptomycin sulfate with influenza vaccine, V:3466 for mycetoma, III:2275 Streptozocin, IV:2472 Streptozyme test, IV:3180, 3181–3182 Stress (Physiology) vs. dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 with endorectal ultrasonography, II:1195 fetal (See Fetal distress) general adaptation syndrome from, III:1424–1425 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388 Stress (Psychology), IV:3185–3187, 3186t aldosterone test for, I:101 ambulatory electrocardiography for, III:1653 amenorrhea from, I:147, III:2169, 2172 angina pectoris and, I:194 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266–267 anxiety from, I:317–318 arrhythmias from, I:353 asthma from, I:236, 380, 381 atopic dermatitis from, I:403 atrial ectopic beats from, I:406 bed-wetting from, I:454 binge eating disorder from, I:481–482 blood pressure and, III:1752 with bone biopsy, I:539 bruxism from, I:608, 609 bulimia and, I:612 3914 canker sores from, II:648 in cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 catecholamines in, II:677 from celiac disease, II:682 with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:695 children’s health and, II:763 chronic, IV:3188 cluster headache from, II:824 cold sores from, II:846 common cold from, II:869 constipation from, II:906 with coronary heart disease, II:930 corticotropin levels and, I:65 cortisol test and, II:938 costochondritis and, II:940 cyclic vomiting syndrome from, II:980 depression and, II:1033 dermatitis from, II:1037 diarrhea from, I:264 vs. dissociative disorders, II:1087 with dissociative identity disorder, III:2245 dry mouth from, II:1109 dyspepsia from, II:1118 fainting from, II:1280 female sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 with fibromyalgia, II:1326 general adaptation syndrome from, III:1424–1425 generalized anxiety disorder from, III:1428 genital herpes outbreaks from, III:1440 with growth hormone tests, III:1489 Gulf War syndrome from, III:1495 hallucinations from, III:1504 heart attacks from, III:1533 hiccups from, III:1632 hives from, III:1643 with hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 hyperemesis gravidarum and, III:1703 hyperhidrosis from, III:1704 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1708 with hypoglycemia, III:1734 with IBS, III:1866 immobilization and, III:1782 impotence from, III:1805 with inert gas narcosis, IV:2357 in infertility, III:1832 insomnia from, III:1843, IV:3088 itching from, III:1874 keratitis from, III:1904 leukocytosis from, III:1993 lichen planus from, III:1997 from lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 from mastectomy, I:587 with Meniere’s disease, III:2152 as migraine trigger, III:2187 myocardial ischemia from, III:1868 night terrors from, IV:2355, 2356 palpitations from, IV:2465 paranoia from, IV:2493 with periodic paralysis, IV:2544 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 PMS from, IV:2711 premature ejaculation from, IV:2699 prolactin test and, IV:2723 prostatitis from, IV:2741 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747 psoriasis from, IV:2756 Raynaud disease from, IV:2823–2825 scurvy from, IV:2978 senior’s health and, IV:2996 shingles from, IV:3032 sleep disorders from, IV:3088 spurious polycythemia from, IV:2982 tension headache and, V:3254 torticollis and, V:3340 with vitiligo, V:3527 WBC count and differential for, V:3557 Stress fractures vs. bunions, I:615 from exercise, II:1251 sports-related, IV:3145 Stress incontinence. See Urinary incontinence Stress inoculation training, IV:2687 Stress management, IV:3186–3187 aging and, I:70, 72 for alcoholism, I:98 Alexander technique for, I:103–105 aromatherapy for, I:348, 349 art therapy for, I:367 ayurvedic medicine for, I:431 for bruxism, I:609 for coronary heart disease, II:933 for diabetes mellitus, II:1052 for heart attack prevention, III:1536 for hypertension prevention, III:1722, 1723 for infertility, III:1833 for men, III:2165 for migraine prevention, III:2189 for mood disorders, III:2217 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2708 reflexology for, IV:2842 reiki for, IV:2848 for renal artery occlusion, IV:2856 for renal artery stenosis, IV:2857 for renovascular hypertension, IV:2860 rolfing for, IV:2912 for salivary gland tumors, IV:2934 for sick sinus syndrome, IV:3040 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 Tai chi for, V:3238 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from angiography, I:200 with antiangina agents, I:230 from aortic dissection, I:327 aphasia from, I:333, IV:3123 from arteriovenous malformations, I:357 aspirin for prevention of, I:378 from atherosclerosis, I:394 from atrial fibrillation, I:407 barbiturate-induced coma for, I:444 from blood clots, I:407, V:3298 blood-viscosity reducing agents for, I:520 vs. botulism, I:560 from cardiac catheterization, II:657 from carotid sinus massage, II:667 CAT scan for, II:875 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:694 chemonucleolysis and, II:739 vs. CO poisoning, II:651 from cocaine, II:832 after coronary artery bypass grafting, II:928 creatine kinase test for, II:948 cystometry for, II:995 deglutition disorders from, II:1243 dementia from, II:1024 with Depo-Provera, II:1031–1032 from diabetes mellitus, II:1048, 1052 dizziness from, II:1095 Doppler ultrasonography for, II:1097, 1098 from drug overdose, II:1104, 1106 from ECMO, II:1257 electroencephalography for, II:1151 from embolism, I:355 embolism and, II:1169 endarterectomy and, II:1182 enteral nutrition after, V:3400 ethnic differences in, III:2199 from Fabry’s disease, III:2005 vs. facial paralysis, I:461 fecal incontinence from, II:1300 hearing loss from, III:1528 from heart surgery, III:1544 with heart transplantation, III:1545 from heart valve replacement, III:1552 hemoglobin test for, III:1577 from high cholesterol, II:786, 794, III:1708 from hyperaldosteronism, III:1696 from hypercholesterolemia, III:1699 from hypertension, II:929 hypertension and, III:1720 vs. hypothermia, III:1754 hypothermia from, III:1754 from implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, III:1803–1804 lung abscess and, III:2038 magnesium and, III:2078 with MAO inhibitors, III:2215 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in men, III:2164, 2167 movement disorders from, III:2221 MRI for, III:2082 muscle relaxants and, III:2258, 2259 muscle spasms and cramps of, III:2260 from myocardial resection, III:2288 neurogenic bladder from, IV:2347 neurologic examination for, IV:2352–2353 ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2395 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 paralysis from, IV:2491 paresthesia from, IV:2365 PET scan for, IV:2677 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 rectal prolapse from, IV:2835 rehabilitation for, IV:2846, 2847 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 from sickle cell disease, IV:3043 from sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 from smoking, IV:3104 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3201, 3203 tarsorrhaphy and, V:3243 TCD after, V:3364 from temporal arteritis, V:3247–3248 from thoracic surgery, V:3289 from thrombocytosis, V:3297 thrombolytic therapy for, V:3298 vs. TIA, V:3370 tremor from, V:3381 urinary incontinence from, V:3454 from vasculitis, V:3478 with vasodilators, V:3482 vasodilators for, V:3482 from ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 from ventricular assist devices, V:3498 vision training for, V:3507–3508 vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 in women, V:3576 Stroke volume, III:1537 Stroma, III:1904 Strongyloides stercoralis, V:3291 Strongyloidiasis, V:3291–3293 antihelminthic drugs for, I:173 indigestion from, III:1813 Structural integration. See Rolfing Structured Clinical Interview for DSMIV Dissociative Disorders, II:1087, III:2246 Struvite stones, kidney, III:1917, 1919 Strychnine ipecac and, III:1857, 1858 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2260 Strychnos nux vomica, for impotence, III:1806 Stuttering, IV:3122–3125, IV:3199–3200 3915 Stuttering for tension headache prevention, V:3256 for TMJ, V:3250 for torticollis, V:3341 for ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 for wheezing, V:3554 for whiplash, V:3556 Stress management guided imagery for, III:1490 music therapy for, III:2269 Stress MUGA scan. See Multiple-gated acquisition scan Stress polycythemia. See Spurious polycythemia Stress reduction, IV:3187–3191 for chronic fatique syndrome, II:803 for general adaptation syndrome, III:1425 for hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 with meditation, V:3594 for RSV, IV:2869 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for syphilis, IV:3230 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for tension headache, V:3256 Stress test. See Exercise stress test Stress urinary incontinence, V:3453 Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure for, III:2123–2124 sphincter electromyography for, II:1255 Stretching for contractures, II:913 for costochondritis, II:940 for exercise, II:1251 for fibromyalgia, II:1327 for hammertoe, III:1505 for heat stress disorders, III:1557 with heel spurs, III:1563 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for postpolio syndrome, IV:2684 for sciatica, IV:2964 for senior’s health, IV:3000 for tennis elbow prevention, V:3253 for TMJ, V:3250 Striae, III:2116 Stridor, IV:3193–3194 with croup, II:960 from epiglottitis, II:1220 from laryngitis, III:1959 from vocal cord paralysis, V:3530 String test, V:3292 Strobiles. See Hops Stroke, IV:3194–3198, 3196f with ACE inhibitors, I:204 from alcoholism, I:96 from aneurysmectomy, I:193 Stye Stye, II:1270 Styptics for nosebleeds, IV:2364 SU5516 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 Subacute granulomatous thyroiditis. See Subacute thyroiditis Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis, III:2139, IV:3200–3201 Subacute sensorimotor paralysis, IV:2550 Subacute thyroiditis, V:3318, 3319, 3320 Subaortic stenosis, II:900 Subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3194, IV:3201–3204 from cerebral aneurysm, II:697–698, 700 dementia from, II:1024 in women, V:3576 Subarachnoid space in cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 in spinal anesthesia, I:190 Subclavian venous access, V:3494 Subcortical aphasia, I:334 Subculture, I:523 Subcutaneous chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Subcutaneous fat in flesh-eating disease, II:1336 Subcutaneous filariasis. See Filariasis Subdural hematoma, IV:3204–3206, 3204, 3205 dementia from, II:1024 from head injuries, III:1521 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 from ventricular shunts, V:3503 Subglottis, III:1950, 1952 in laryngeal cancer, III:1515 Subjective tinnitus. See Tinnitus Subluxation, II:1082–1085 Subluxations. See Dislocations Submucous fibroids. See Uterine fibroids Subscapularis, IV:2920 Subserous fibroids. See Uterine fibroids Substance abuse, I:17, 18, II:840, IV:3206–3212, 3207f, 3210t as addiction, I:50, 51–52 from anxiety, I:318 anxiety disorders and, I:322, 323, 324 battered child syndrome and, I:452, 453 vs. bipolar disorder, I:487 bipolar disorder from, I:486 in children, II:763 with conduct disorder, II:883, 884 conduct disorder from, II:883 defined, IV:3206 3916 dementia from, II:1024 diagnosis of, IV:3209–3210 vs. dissociative disorders, II:1086, 1087 dissociative identity disorder and, III:2246 in drowning, IV:2326, 2328 with dysthymic disorder, II:1034 frequency by gender and age, IV:3210t in gays and lesbians, III:1414, 1415, 1416 group therapy for, III:1485 hemoptysis from, III:1589 hypothermia from, III:1753, 1754 impotence from, IV:2531 with liver transplantation, III:2029 lung abscess from, III:2039 malnutrition from, III:2104 mental retardation from, III:2174 neurologic examination for, IV:2351 in oppositional defiant disorder, IV:2396–2397 with oppositional defiant disorder, II:884, IV:2396 oppositional defiant disorder from, IV:2396 personality disorders and, IV:2565 prognosis for, IV:3211 psychosis from, IV:2766 as psychosocial disorder, IV:2767 from PTSD, IV:2686 sexual dysfunctions and, IV:3015, 3016 sleep disorders from, IV:3088–3089 stillbirth from, IV:3163 sudden infant death syndrome from, IV:3213–3215 with surgery for obesity, IV:2379 treatment for, IV:3210–3211 See also Alcoholism; Drug abuse Substance addiction. See Substance abuse Substance dependence. See Substance abuse Substance P, III:2187 Substance withdrawal syndrome, IV:3210, V:3572–3574 from anti-insomnia agents, I:283 anxiety from, I:318 from barbiturates, I:445 from caffeine, II:625 from central nervous system depressants, II:689 from cocaine, II:833 delirium with, II:1021 vs. generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 hallucinations from, III:1504 methadone for, III:2181–2183 from nicotine, IV:3108 with opioid analgesics, I:176 from SSRIs, IV:2992 from substance abuse, IV:3207, 3208, 3210 tremor from, V:3381 from tricyclic antidepressants, I:259 Substantia nigra, III:2222, IV:2500 Subthalamic nucleus, III:2222 Subtotal hysterectomy. See Hysterectomy Subtotal pancreatectomy. See Pancreatectomy Subungal hematoma, II:1332, 1333 Subunit 129. See Brain proteins Succimer, III:1967 Succimides as anticonvulsants, I:253 Sucralfate with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for ulcers, I:313–314 Sucrets Cough Control. See Dextromethorphan Sucrose, II:649 Suction for atelectasis, I:390 for brain abscess, I:567 with chest physical therapy, II:746 for COPD, II:811 cross infection from, III:1674 nasogastric (See Nasogastric suction) with pyloroplasty, IV:2792 for respiratory insufficiency, IV:2866 Suction-assisted lipectomy. See Liposuction Suction curettage. See Vacuum curettage Suction dilation. See Vacuum curettage Sudafed. See Pseudoephedrine Sudan black B stain, III:1985 Sudden cardiac death, IV:3212–3213 with cholinergic agents, II:795 from congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 from coronary heart disease, II:929 CPR for, II:661–662 electrophysiologic tests for, II:1163 from exercise test, IV:3192 from fibrillation, II:1015 from hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 from hypokalemia, III:1739, 1740 from myocarditis, III:2290 from Valsalva maneuver, V:3471 from ventricular ectopic beats, V:3499 wilderness medicine for, V:3562 Sudden death from anorexia nervosa, I:213 from athletic heart syndrome, I:400 Sudden infant death syndrome, IV:3213–3215, 3214t from botulism, I:560 prolonged QT syndrome and, IV:2724 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for ulcerative colitis, V:3431 Sulfate deficiency of, III:2190–2192 supplements of, III:2196 toxicity, III:2194 Sulfinpyrazone with aspirin, I:379 for gout, III:1477 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 Sulfisoxazole, II:993, IV:3216 Sulfites allergy to, I:601 asthma from, III:2050 Sulfonamides, IV:3215–3218 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antimalarials, I:288 with antirheumatic drugs, I:307 birth defects from, I:490 for blastomycosis, IV:3121 with bleeding time test, I:514 for brucellosis, I:606 cholestasis from, II:784 for Crohn’s disease, II:958 with diuretics, II:1090 erythema multiforme from, II:1226 erythema nodosum, II:1227 G6PD and, III:1465 kidney damage from, IV:2337 neutropenia from, IV:2354 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 with penicillins, IV:2529 photosensitivity from, III:1715, IV:2589 serum sickness from, IV:3008 for sinusitis, IV:3058 toxic epidermal necrolysis from, V:3345 for trachoma, V:3356 Sulfonylureas, for diabetes mellitus, I:262–263, II:1051 Sulfur for acne, I:25 for chickenpox, II:751 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 in mineral deficiencies, III:2190 in nutrition, III:2196 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for tinea, IV:2909 Sulfur granules, from actinomycosis, I:35 Sulfuric acid, with gastric lavage, IV:3169 Sulindac aspirin allergy and, I:378 cholestasis from, II:784 for polyhydramnios, IV:2664 Sulphinpyrazone for gout, I:282 for hyperuricemia, I:282 Sulphur. See Sulfur Sulpiride, for Tourette syndrome, V:3344 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Sumac for sore throats, IV:3120 for strep throat, IV:3179 Sumatriptan for cluster headache, II:825 for headache, III:1524 for migraine, III:2188 for migraines, I:289, 290, 291 for pain management, IV:2463 Summer grippe, II:1212 Summers, Elaine, III:2226 Sumox. See Amoxicillin Sun blocks. See Sunscreening agents Sun exposure, IV:3220 with albinism, I:91 brain tumors from, I:574 cancer and, II:633, 637 cataracts from, II:675 cold sores from, II:845 dehydration from, II:1017 with diuretics, II:1089 with fluoroquinolones, II:1345 genital herpes outbreaks from, III:1440 head and neck cancer from, III:1516, 1519 hyperpigmentation from, III:1715, 1716 with isotretinoin, I:227 lack of vitamin D deficiency from, V:3515 laser surgery for, III:1960, 1962 melanoma from, III:2095–2096 methotrexate and, I:248 moles from, III:2210 non-melanoma skin cancer from, IV:3066 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 with photosensitivity, IV:2589–2590 with pigmentation disorders, IV:3078 for pityriasis rosea, IV:2610 with prochlorperazine, I:293 with rosacea, IV:2918 skin resurfacing for, IV:3079 with sulfonamides, IV:3216 sunburn and, IV:3218–3219 sunburn prevention and, IV:3219 systemic lupus erythematosus and, IV:3234 with tetracyclines, V:3267 with tretinoin, I:227 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:259 ultraviolet light treatment and, V:3436 Sun-moon yoga. See Hatha yoga Sun sensitivity. See Photosensitivity disorders Sunburn, I:617, IV:3218–3219, 3219 with antiacne agents, I:227 with dermatitis, II:1037 local anesthesia for, I:190 3917 Sunburn Sudeck’s atrophy. See Reflex sympathetic dystrophy Sufentanil, I:187 Suffocation. See Asphyxia Sufi walking. See Walking Sufinpyrazone, for gout, III:1479, 1481 Sugar cane fever. See Leptospirosis Sugar diabetes. See Diabetes mellitus Sugar tests with nalidixic acid, V:3448 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 Sugars. See Carbohydrates Suicide, II:1033 attempts from anorexia nervosa, I:213 from child abuse, II:756 with dissociative identity disorder, III:2245 gays and lesbians and, III:1415, 1416 group therapy and, III:1485 hospitalization and, IV:2768 from hypoglycemia, III:1735 with hysteria, III:1764 kidney damage from, IV:2336–2337 in men, III:2164 mental illness and, IV:2769 physical restraints and, IV:2760 poisoning from, IV:2643 schizophrenia and, IV:2766 vs. self mutilation, IV:2993, 2994 from SSRIs, IV:2991 Sulamyd. See Sodium sulfacetamide Sulbactam, for epiglottitis, II:1220 Sulconazole, for fungal infections, I:270 Sulconazole nitrate, for athlete’s foot, I:399 Sulfa drugs. See Sulfonamides Sulfacetamide, G6PD and, III:1465 Sulfadiazine toxic epidermal necrolysis from, V:3345 for toxoplasmosis, V:3349 Sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine, for malaria, III:2090 Sulfamethoxazole for food poisoning, II:1355–1356 for mycetoma, III:2275 Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, for listeriosis, III:2013–2014 Sulfapyridine, G6PD and, III:1465 Sulfasalazine for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 for Crohn’s disease, II:958, 959 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for proctitis, IV:2719 psoriatic arthritis and, IV:2759 for rheumatoid arthritis, I:305, IV:2901 Sunburn melanoma from, III:2096, 2099 with nalidixic acid, V:3448 with photosensitivity, IV:2589 from phototherapy, IV:2591 with pigmentation disorders, IV:3078 vs. prickly heat, IV:2716 vesicles from, IV:3074 Sundew, for croup, II:960 Sundowner’s Syndrome, I:136 Sunglasses for albinism, IV:3078 for macular degeneration, III:2077 for pinguecula and pterygium prevention, IV:2602 with UV coating, II:1266 Sunlamps conjunctivitis from, II:903 vs. sun exposure, IV:3220 Sunlight physical allergy from, IV:2591–2592 for psoriasis, IV:2757 Sunna circumcision. See Female genital mutilation Sunscreen for wilderness travel, V:3563 Sunscreening agents, IV:3220–3221 for albinism, I:91, IV:3078 for burn prevention, I:620 for cold sores, II:846 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for eyelid disease prevention, II:1273 for heat stress disorders, III:1558 for hyperpigmentation, III:1715, 1716 for melanoma prevention, III:2099 for moles, III:2211 photosensitivity and, IV:2589, 2590 with rosacea, IV:2918 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067–3068 for skin lesions prevention, IV:3077 for sunburn prevention, IV:3219 for vitiligo, V:3527 Sunscreens. See Sunscreening agents Sunsetting. See Sundowner’s Syndrome Superficial fascia. See Fascia Superficial gastritis. See Gastritis Superficial parotidectomy. See Parotidectomy Superficial punctate keratitis. See Keratitis Superficial spreading melanoma, III:2095 Superinfection from granuloma inguinale, III:1483, 1484 of hepatitis B and D, III:1605 Superior mediastinal syndrome. See Superior vena cava syndrome 3918 Superior vena cava occlusion of, IV:3221–3223 Superior vena cava obstruction. See Superior vena cava syndrome Superior vena cava syndrome, III:2047–2048, IV:3221–3223 Superotemporal branch vein, IV:2878 Superoxide dismutase with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:164 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 Superoxides in chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 vitamin E deficiency and, V:3518 Support bras. See Bras Support garments for abdominal hernias, III:1624 for epididymitis, II:1219 after liposuction, III:2010 Support groups for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:16 for anxiety, I:321 for caregivers, II:1026 for caregivers of Alzheimer’s patients, I:139 for cesarean section, II:727 for child abuse, II:756 for children, II:765 for enterostomy patients, II:1211 for impulse control disorders, III:1808 for mastectomy, III:2130 for obesity, IV:2377 for parents of stillbirth, IV:3163 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for somatoform disorders, IV:3117 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 for substance abuse, IV:3210 Support stockings for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for edema, II:1135 for varicose veins, V:3477 Supportive cancer therapy, II:642–645, II:742 Supportive therapy for anxiety, I:321 for cancer (See Supportive cancer therapy) for hypochondriasis, III:1733 for nasal trauma, IV:2318 for postpartum depression, IV:2682 for schizoid personality disorder, IV:2566 for whiplash, V:3555 Suppositories for fecal incontinence, II:1301 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 Supprelin. See Histrelin Suppressed immune system. See Immunocompromised host Suppressive therapy, III:1442–1443, 1443 Suppuration in abscess drainage, I:16 in anaerobic infections, I:168 cultures for, V:3578 in empyema, II:1175 from gangrene, III:1394 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 Supraglottitis. See Epiglottitis Suprane. See Desfluorane Suprapubic bladder aspiration for urinalysis, V:3445 Suprapubic tube for urinary incontinence, V:3455 for urine cultures, V:3456 Supraspinatus, IV:2920 Suprasternal notch artery in aortic coarctation, II:830 Supratentorial brain tumors. See Brain tumors Supraventricular arrhythmia. See Arrhythmia Suprax. See Cefixime Surface water, giardiasis from, III:1450 Surfactant for premature infants, III:2247–2248 with prematurity, IV:2706 in respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 Surfer’s ear, III:1528, 1529 Surgeon General’s Report on Nutrition and Health on body weight, III:1535 on coronary heart disease prevention, II:933 Surgery, III:1426–1427 abdominal (See Abdominal surgery) for abdominal wall defect, I:6 for acromegaly, I:33–34 acupuncture with, I:40 for adenocarcinoma, II:1040 from DES exposure, II:1040 for amyloidosis, I:162 anaerobic infections from, I:167 for anal atresia, I:169 for anal cancer, I:171 for anal warts, I:172 anemia and, I:182, 183 for angiomas, I:495, 496 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 for anorectal fistula, I:211 antibiotic prophylaxis for, IV:2726–2727 anticoagulants during, I:250, 251 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 for aortic aneurysm, I:326 for aortic coarctation, II:830 aortic dissection from, I:327 arrhythmia from, II:679 for arteriovenous fistula, I:356 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for diabetic foot infections, II:1054 diarrhea from, II:1066 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1093 for diverticulum, II:889 dry mouth from, II:1109 for duodenal obstruction, II:1111 ear (See Ear surgery) for echinococcosis, II:1128 edema from, II:1135 for electric shock injuries, II:1144 electroencephalography during, II:1151 embolism and, I:355, II:1169 for empyema, II:1177 for endometrial cancer, II:1190–1191 for entropion and ectropion, II:1272 esophageal (See Esophageal surgery) for esophageal atresia, II:1239 evoked potential studies for, II:1248 exercise after, II:1250 exploratory (See Exploratory surgery) for exstrophy, II:889 eye (See Eye surgery) for facial paralysis, I:463 for fecal incontinence, II:1301 fibrin split products and, II:1319–1320 for filariasis, II:1331 for foreign object removal, II:1360 for fracture repair, II:1360 for fractures, II:1365 for furunculosis, I:537 for galactorrhea, III:1376 for gallbladder cancer, III:1380 for gallstone ileus, III:1388 for ganglion, III:1392 for gangrene, III:1395 gangrene from, III:1393–1394, 1396 gas from, I:271 for gastrinomas, III:1403, 1404 for giant diverticula, II:1093 for gout, III:1477 for gynecomastia, III:1498 for hammertoe, III:1505–1506 for head and neck cancer, III:1517–1518 for head injuries, III:1522 for hearing loss, I:415 for heart murmurs, III:1542 for heart valve diseases, V:3474 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for hemorrhoids and anal fissures, I:211 for hernias, III:1625–1627 hernias from, III:1623 hiccups from, III:1631 for hyperhidrosis, III:1704 for hyperparathyroidism, III:1714 hypnotherapy for, III:1729 hysteroscopy as, III:1767 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for ileus, III:1780 immobilization and, III:1780 incentive spirometry after, III:1839 infectious arthritis and, III:1819, 1820–1821 for infertility, III:1832 for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 for intestinal polyps, III:1851 intravenous therapy after, IV:2370 for intussusception, III:1856 IV fluid replenishment after, III:1853 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 keloids from, III:1903 for kidney stones, III:1918 for kyphosis, III:1932 for lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1938, 1939 laparoscopic (See Laparoscopy) for laryngeal cancer, III:1952–1953, 1954–1956 laser (See Laser surgery) laxatives after, III:1963 leeches in, III:1970–1971 in life support, III:2000 for liver cancer, III:2020–2021 for liver cirrhosis, II:817 liver encephalopathy from, III:2022 local anesthesia for, I:190 for lower esophageal ring, III:2035 lung (See Lung surgery) lung abscess and, III:2039 lymphedema from, III:2067 lymphography for, III:2066 for macular degeneration, III:2076–2077 malnutrition from, III:2104 for MALT lymphomas, III:2108 for Marfan syndrome, III:2116 for melanoma, III:2098 for mucormycosis, III:2232 with Munchausen syndrome, III:2258 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for mycetoma, III:2275, 2276 myxedema coma from, III:1757 for myxoma, III:2306 for nail removal, IV:2309 for nasal papillomas, IV:2315 for nasal polyps, IV:2316 neck (See Neck surgery) for necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 for nephritis, IV:2334 for neuralgia, IV:2339, 2340 for neuroblastoma, IV:2341 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 NSAIDs and, IV:2362 for obesity, IV:2376 with oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 for ophthalmoplegia, IV:2395 opioid analgesics for, I:175 oral (See Oral surgery) 3919 Surgery for arteriovenous malformations, I:358 arthroscopic (See Arthroscopy) for aspergillosis, I:376 aspirin before, I:378 atelectasis from, I:390, 391 back (See Back surgery) for Bartholin’s gland cyst, I:450, 451 for bile duct cancer, I:478–479 for biliary atresia, I:480 for bladder stones, I:511 blood clots from, III:1800 blood transfusions for, V:3367 for botulism, I:561–562 brain (See Brain surgery) for breast cancer, I:581, 583, 584 for Budd-Chiari syndrome, I:610 for bursitis, I:621 for cancer, II:635, 636 as definitive therapy, II:638–639, 640 as palliative therapy, II:641 for carbuncle, I:537 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2344 cardiac tamponade from, IV:2538 for carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668, 669 cellulitis from, II:684 for cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 for cerebral aneurysm, II:699–700 for cervical cancer, II:714, IV:2487 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for chancroid, II:730 with chemotherapy, II:740 with chest physical therapy, II:745 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790 with cholesterol tests, II:792 cholinergic agents for, II:794 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 for cleft lip and palate, II:819–820 for cluster headache, II:825 for coccyx injuries, II:837 for colon cancer, II:852–853 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:886 for congenital brain defects, II:891 for congenital heart disease, II:901–902 for congenital ureter anomalies, II:896 for contractures, II:913, 914 corneal transplantation, II:919–921 for corns, II:924 corticotropin levels and, I:65 cross infection from, III:1674 for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 for cystitis, II:993 cytoreductive (See Debulking) with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 dental (See Oral surgery) Surgery for osteoarthritis, IV:2414, 2999, 3001 for osteochondrosis, IV:2416 osteomyelitis from, IV:2419 for osteopetroses, IV:2424 for otosclerosis, III:1529 for Paget’s disease, IV:2456 for pain, IV:2460 for pain management, IV:2463 palliative (See Palliative care) for pancarditis, IV:2898 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472, 2476 for pancreatitis, IV:2480 and paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for Parkinson disease, IV:2502–2503 for penile cancer, IV:2530 for perforated septum, IV:2535 for peripheral neuropathy, IV:2554 for peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2579 plastic (See Plastic surgery) for pleural effusion, IV:2630 pneumonia from, IV:2639 for polydactyly and syndactyly, IV:2661–2662 for post-hepatic jaundice, III:1884 for postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2681 preventive (See Preventive surgery) for priapism, IV:2715 prolactin test and, IV:2724 for prostate cancer, IV:2733 prostatitis from, IV:2740 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein-energy malnutrition from, IV:2743 for puerperal infection, IV:2775 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 for pyelonephritis, IV:2790 radiation therapy and, IV:2810 for rectal cancer, IV:2831 for rectal prolapse, IV:2836 for retinoblastoma, IV:2831 rib (See Rib surgery) for roundworm infections, IV:2924 for salivary gland tumors, IV:2934 for sarcomas, IV:2944, 2945 for sciatica, IV:2964–2965 for scoliosis, IV:2972, 2973 sedation for, IV:2983 for seizures, IV:2987–2988 septic shock from, IV:3005 for sickle cell disease, IV:3047 for sinusitis, IV:3058 for skin lesions, IV:3076 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for snoring, IV:3112 for spinal cord tumors, IV:3133 for splenic trauma, IV:3142 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 3920 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for stomach cancer, IV:3165–3166 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3203 for subdural hematoma, IV:3205 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 for tattoo removal, IV:2599 for TEF, V:3352 for tendinitis, V:3251 for tennis elbow, V:3253 for testicular cancer, V:3258 for tetralogy of Fallot, V:3269 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 for thrombophlebitis, V:3301 for thyroiditis, V:3320 for TMJ, V:3250 for traction, V:3357–3358 for tremors, V:3383 for trigeminal neuralgia, V:3391 for tuberculosis, V:3409 urinary diversion, V:3451–3453 for urinary incontinence, I:511 for varicose veins, V:3477 for velopharyngeal insufficiency, V:3490 Surgical abortion. See Vacuum curettage Surgical anesthesia. See General anesthesia Surgical biopsy. See Biopsy Surgical debridement. See Debridement Surgical decompression for pain management, IV:2463 for spinal stenosis, IV:3137 Surgical excision. See Excision Surgical extraction, for guinea worm infection, III:1494 Surgical flaps in breast reconstruction, I:587 leeches for, III:1971 with nasal packing, IV:2314 Surgical instruments aneurysm clips with MRI, III:2082 Surgical resection. See Resection Surgical revascularization. See Revascularization Surgical stapling, for obesity, IV:2379 Surgical wound infection botulism in, I:560 with bowel resection, I:564 from cholecystectomy, II:778 from colostomy, II:863 cultures for, V:3578 with disk removal, II:1082 hospital acquired, III:1674 from joint replacement, III:1892 from mycobacterial infections, III:2277 nasal irrigation for, IV:2312 from necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 with plastic surgery, IV:2622 from pyloroplasty, IV:2792 sepsis from, IV:3004 from staphylococcus, IV:3156 from urinary diversion, V:3452 Survanta, for respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2864 Sustained ventricular tachycardia. See Ventricular tachycardia Sutherland, William, II:945 Sutures topical antibiotics and, I:245 for wound repair, III:1937 for wounds, V:3583 from animal bites, I:207, 500 SVC syndrome. See Superior vena cava syndrome SVCS. See Superior vena cava syndrome Swallowing difficulty. See Deglutition disorders Swamp fever. See Leptospirosis Swank diet, III:2253 Swanz-Ganz catheterization. See Pulmonary artery catheterization Sway back, I:22 Sweat discoloration of from antituberculosis agents, I:311 Sweat gland diseases, III:2003 Sweat glands in cystic fibrosis, II:987 in prickly heat, IV:2716 Sweat retention syndrome. See Prickly heat Sweating dehydration from, II:1017 excessive (See Hyperhidrosis) gustatory (See Gustatory sweating) in heat stress disorders, III:1556–1558 from hypoglycemia, III:1735 hyponatremia from, III:1743 malnutrition from, III:2104 for multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2235 nausea with, IV:2325 orthostatic hypotension from, IV:2411 in prickly heat, IV:2716, 2717 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 while eating (See Gustatory sweating) Sweating therapy, II:1043 Swedish massage. See Massage Swedish massage, III:2126 Swedish porphyria. See Acute intermittent porphyria GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Syncope. See Fainting Syndactyly, IV:2660–2662, 2661, IV:2724 5p- syndrome. See Cri du chat syndrome Synergistic gangrene. See Flesh-eating disease Synesthesia, III:2073 Synovial cysts. See Ganglion Synovial fluid in bursitis, I:620 in joints, I:364 in juvenile arthritis, III:1892 in rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 Synovial fluid analysis, III:1889–1890 for gout, III:1477 for infectious arthritis, III:1820 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Synovial hernia. See Ganglion Synovial membrane biopsy of, III:1888 in juvenile arthritis, III:1892 in rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2900 Synthetic sweeteners. See Artificial sweeteners Synthroid. See Levothyroxine Syphilis, IV:3021, 3022, IV:3226–3231, 3227 AIDS and, I:80 antenatal tests for, I:219 aortic valve insufficiency from, I:328 birth defects from, I:491 cerebrospinal fluid analysis for, II:706 vs. chancroid, II:729 condom use and, II:881, 882, IV:3023 corneal ulcers from, II:922 dementia from, II:1024 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 gay and lesbian health and, III:1416 vs. genital herpes, III:1442 granuloma inguinale with, III:1483 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 from human bites, I:498 keratitis from, III:1905 in men, III:2167 vs. nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 optic atrophy from, IV:2399 orchitis from, IV:2408 papule and plaques from, IV:3074 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 perforated septum from, IV:2535 perinatal, IV:2541–2543 vs. pityriasis rosea, IV:2609 proctitis from, IV:2719 from rape and sexual assault, IV:2817, 2818 vs. rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 stillbirth from, IV:3163 TORCH test for, V:3338 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 uveitis from, V:3461 Syphilitic retinopathy, IV:2889 Syrup of ipecac for poisoning, IV:2645 See also Ipecac Systematic Classic of Acupuncture, I:40 Systemic antifungal drugs, I:267–270 Systemic elastorrhexis, IV:2753 Systemic enzyme therapy. See Enzyme therapy Systemic lupus erythematosus, I:422, 423, 425, IV:3231–3235, 3232f, 3233 with ACE inhibitors, I:204 antinuclear antibody test for, I:294–295 ascites from, I:372 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 chronic kidney failure from, II:806 with complement deficiencies, II:874 vs. discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1079 Guillain-Barré syndrome with, III:1492 HLA DNA probes for, III:1681 from human parvovirus B19, II:1329 with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 immune complex test for, III:1783 infectious arthritis from, III:1819 nephrotic syndrome from, IV:2335 neutropenia from, IV:2354 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 paresthesia from, IV:2365 pericardiocentesis for, IV:2537–2538 peritonitis from, IV:2556 pigmentation disorders from, IV:3078 pleurisy from, IV:2631 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2748 pulmonary hypertension from, IV:2785 rash from, IV:2820 with relapsing polychondritis, IV:2854 vs. rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Sjögren’s syndrome with, IV:3063 dry mouth from, II:1109 with vasculitis, V:3479 vs. vitiligo, V:3527 Systemic onset juvenile arthritis. See Juvenile arthritis Systemic steroids. See Steroids Systemic therapy for cancer, II:640 Systolic hypertension, III:1721 Systolic murmur. See Heart murmurs Systolic pressure. See Blood pressure, systolic Syzygium aromaticum. See Cloves 3921 Syzygium aromaticum Sweet balm. See Lemon balm Sweet elm. See Slippery elm Sweet orange, I:350 Sweet pea, IV:2644 Sweet wood. See Licorice Sweetweed. See Marsh mallow Sweigart, Lulu, III:2226 Swelling. See Edema Swimmer’s ear. See Otitis externa Swimmer’s itch itching from, III:1874 in schistosomiasis, IV:2954 Swimmer’s shoulder. See Rotator cuff injury Swimming in drowning and near drowning, IV:2326, 2327 after eye muscle surgery, II:1270 with middle ear ventilation, III:2305 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 Swimming pool conjunctivitis. See Inclusion conjunctivitis Swine flu vaccine, III:1492 Swine snort. See Dandelion Swiss-type agammaglobulinemia, IV:3009 Sydenham’s chorea, IV:2897, 3180, IV:3223–3224 Sylibum marianum. See Milk thistle Sylvestus. See Valerian Symadine. See Amantadine Symathectomy, IV:2840 Symbolization anxiety and, I:319 art therapy and, I:367–368 Symmetrel. See Amantadine Symmetrical fetal growth retardation. See Fetal growth retardation Sympathectomy, IV:3224–3226 Sympathetic dysreflexia, IV:2346 Sympathetic nerve inhibitors, I:397 Sympathetic nervous system in acrocyanosis, I:31 reflex sympathetic dystrophy of, IV:2839–2840 Symphytum, II:1365 Symphytum officinale. See Comfrey Symphytum officinalis. See Symphytum Symptomatic ischemia, III:1868 Symptomatic Parkinson disease movement disorders from, III:2221 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 Symptomatic porphyria. See Porphyria cutanea tarda Synarel. See Nafarelin T-cells T T-cells. See T-lymphocytes T-helper cells. See T-lymphocytes T-lymphocyte deficiency, III:1785, 1787 See also DiGeorge’s syndrome T-lymphocytes in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 in AIDS, I:75–76, 82, 84–85, 87 in allergies, I:115 for brain tumors, I:573 in chronic leukemia, III:1990–1991 in common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:975–976 cyclosporins and, III:1796 delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1019 in discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 in hairy cell leukemia, III:1501 Kawasaki syndrome from, III:1901 in lymphocytopenia, III:2070 in lymphomas, III:2092 normal levels of, III:2068 response of delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1020 sensitized delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1019 tests for, I:84–85, III:2067–2068 T-PA. See Tissue plasminogen activator T-plasminogen activator. See Tissue plasminogen activator T-scores, for bone density, I:541 T-shaped uterus, from DES exposure, II:1040 T3RU tests. See Triiodothyronine resin uptake tests T4. See Thyroxine T&A. See Adenoidectomy; Tonsillectomy Tabacum, for motion sickness, III:2219 Tabes dorsalis. See Neurosyphilis Tablework, V:3362 Tabocas combicurdo. See Bayberry Tachycardia aromatherapy for, I:349 in arrhythmias, I:352 atrial (See Atrial tachycardia) from atrial ectopic beats, I:406 with beta blockers, I:476 from clozapine, I:488 electrophysiologic tests for, II:1163–1164, 1165 from near drowning, IV:2327 pacemaker for, IV:2453 from prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2724 3922 from sick sinus syndrome, IV:3039 from ulcerative colitis, V:3430 ventricular (See Ventricular tachycardia) from ventricular ectopic beats, V:3498 from Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3574 Tachypnea, from near drowning, IV:2327 Tacrine, for Alzheimer’s disease, I:138, II:1026, IV:3000 Tacrolimus in immunosuppressive therapy, III:1798 for liver transplantation, III:2029 Taenia saginata cysticerosis from, V:3239–3240, V:3241 Taenia solium cysticerosis from, V:3239–3240, V:3241 Tagamet. See Cimetidine Tagged red blood cell scans. See GI bleeding studies T’ai chi, V:3237–3238, 3238f for anxiety, I:321 for anxiety disorders, I:324 for genital herpes, III:1443 HRT and, III:1673 movement therapy and, III:2224–2225, 2227 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for stress, IV:3186 for stress reduction, IV:3190 Tai chi ch’uan. See Tai chi Tailbone. See Coccyx Taiwan hand-foot-and-mouth disease in, III:1506 Takata, Hawayo, IV:2848 Takayasu’s arteritis, V:3479 Talcum powder ovarian cancer from, IV:2440 for skin lesions, IV:3076 for sunburn, IV:3218 Talipes. See Clubfoot Talipes calacaneus, II:822 Talipes equinovarus clubfoot from, II:822 Tamoxifen for breast cancer, I:584 for cancer, II:637, 740 endometrial cancer and, II:1188, 1191 hysterosonography with, III:1768 for melanoma, III:2099 retinopathy and, IV:2890 risks of, I:248 Tampons, toxic shock syndrome from, IV:3005, V:3346–3348 Tanacetum parthenium. See Feverfew Tang kuei. See Dong quai Tangier disease, III:1741, 1742 Tanner, J.M., IV:2772 Tanner Stages 1-5. See Sexual Maturity Rating stages Tanning beds, IV:3220 Tantra yoga, V:3595 See also Yoga TAO. See Troleandomycin Taoist qigong. See Qigong Tapeworm infections, V:3238–3242, 3239, 3240 antihelminthic drugs for, I:273 echinococcosis, II:1127–1129 indigestion from, III:1813 Tapotement. See Percussion Taraxacum officinale. See Dandelion Tardieu, Ambrose, I:367 Tardive dyskinesia, V:3242–3243 antidepressants and, I:257 from antipsychotic drugs, I:300 from prochlorperazine, I:293 Tarsorrhaphy, V:3243–3244 Tartar in oral hygiene, IV:2406 periodontal diseases from, IV:2547 Tartar emetic, for chickenpox, II:751 Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase stain, III:1985 Tartrazine aspirin allergy and, I:378 in cough suppressants, II:944 Tasmar. See Tolcapone Taste with aging, I:69 hallucinations from, III:1504 loss of (See Ageusia) Taste test neurologic examination for, IV:2351 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 TAT. See Thematic Apperception Test Tattoos, IV:2598–2600 for breast reconstruction, I:588 hepatitis C from, III:1603 skin resurfacing for, IV:3080 Tau proteins, I:135 Tauri’s disease. See Glycogen storage diseases Tavist. See Clemastine Taxol. See Paclitaxel Tay-Sachs disease, III:2004, 2005, 2006, V:3244–3245, 3245 carrier testing for, III:1430, 1436 CVS for, II:800, 801 from recessive inheritance, I:491 Taylor, Andrew, IV:2422 Taylor, Charles, III:2125 Taylor, George, III:2125 Tazarotene, psoriasis and, IV:2756 Tazicef. See Ceftazidime Tazideme. See Ceftazidime GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for cardiac blood pool scan, II:655 for salivary gland scan, IV:2932 Technetium Tc99m pyrophosphate, V:3246 Technetium Tc99m stannous pyrophosphate. See Technetium Teenagers. See Adolescents Teeth abnormalities of from hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 from tetracyclines, V:3267 bleaching of, II:939 bonding of, II:939 calcium for, III:1697 clenching (See Bruxism) crooked (See Malocclusion) crowded (See Malocclusion) damage to with jaw fixation, III:1885 grinding (See Bruxism) impacted (See Impacted tooth) pain (See Toothache) protruding (See Malocclusion) TEF. See Tracheoesophageal fistula Tefla gauze, IV:3006 Tegison. See Etretinate Tegopen. See Cloxacillin Tegretol. See Carbamazepine Telangiectasia, I:388 Telangiectasis, IV:3075 in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 in rosacea, IV:2917 Telemetry, for fetal monitoring, II:760 Telephone cardiac monitor for atrial fibrillation and flutter, I:407 for pacemaker, IV:2454 Teletherapy. See Radiation therapy Tellurium, IV:2909 Telmisartan, for hypertension, I:279–281 Temazepam for insomnia, I:282 for sleep disorders, IV:3091 Temperature body (See Body temperature) room sudden infant death syndrome and, IV:3214–3215 Temperature, body. See Body temperature Temperature changes atopic dermatitis from, I:404 body (See Body Temperature) genital herpes outbreaks from, III:1440 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2261 Template method. See Bleeding time Temporal arteritis, V:3247–3249 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with polymyalgia rheumatica, IV:2666 with vasculitis, V:3479 Temporal resection for seizures, IV:2988 Temporalis muscle neurologic examination for, IV:2351 Temporary aphasia. See Aphasia Temporomandibular joint disorders, V:3249–3250 biofeedback for, I:482 vs. bruxism, I:609 electrical nerve stimulation for, II:1145 from jaw fractures, III:2136 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3110 Tempra. See Acetaminophen TEN. See Toxic epidermal necrolysis Tendinitis, V:3250–3251 from fluoroquinolones, II:1345 NSAIDs for, IV:2361 rotator cuff, IV:2920–2921 sports-related, IV:3145, 3146 Tendon grafts, IV:2921 Tendon injuries arthrography for, I:359 in fingertip, II:1332, 1333 immobilization and, III:1780 mallet finger as, III:2101–2102 repair of, III:1936 shoulder (See Rotator cuff injury) sports-related, IV:3145, 3146 from synovial fluid analysis, III:1889 tendinitis and, V:3250–3251 Tendonitis. See Tendinitis Tendons arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 arthroscopy for, I:364 in bunionectomy, I:616 in bursitis, I:620 in contracture, II:913, IV:3129 damage to from debridement, II:1007 from fluoroquinolones, II:1345 in dislocations and subluxations, II:1083 imaging with MRI, III:2082 release of for contracture, IV:3131 shortening of hammertoe from, III:1505 in stenosing tenosynovitis, V:3392–3393 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1889 tendinitis and, V:3250–3251 Tennis elbow, V:3251–3253, 3253f Tennis shoulder. See Rotator cuff injury Tenoretic. See Atenolol Tenormin. See Atenolol 3923 Tenormin TB. See Tuberculosis TBG tests. See Thyroxine-binding globulin test TCA. See Trichloroacetic acid TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants TCCD. See Dioxin TCD. See Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography TCM. See Chinese traditional medicine TD. See Traveler’s diarrhea Td. See Tetanus-diphtheria toxoids TDM. See Drug therapy monitoring Tea colic from, II:848 for dehydration, II:1018 for folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 green, III:1648 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 HRT and, III:1673 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1703 for insomnia, III:1845 Tea de France. See Lemon balm Tea tree oil for aromatherapy, I:349, 350 for athlete’s foot, I:399 for blastomycosis, I:513 for burns, I:619 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for furunculosis, I:538 for genital herpes, III:1443 for influenza, III:1835 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 for RSV, IV:2869 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 Teachers in child abuse, II:754 Tear duct obstruction. See Lacrimal duct obstruction Tears in corneal ulcers, II:921, 922 discoloration of from antituberculosis agents, I:311 excessive from lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1938 ultrasonography for, II:1258 Tebrazid. See Pyrazinamide Technetium in MUGA scans, III:2233–2234 Technetium 99m pyrophosphate scintigraphy. See Technetium heart scan Technetium 99m sulfur colloid imaging for splenectomy, IV:3139 Technetium DTPA, III:1915 Technetium heart scan, III:1869, V:3245–3247 Technetium MAG3, III:1915 Technetium Tc99m Tenosynovitis Tenosynovitis, II:820 Tenotomy, III:2266 TENS. See Electrical nerve stimulation Tensilon. See Edrophonium Tensilon test, V:3253–3254 Tension headache, III:1523, V:3254–3256, 3255f Tension pneumothorax. See Pneumothorax Tenuate. See Diethylpropion TEP. See Tracheoesophageal puncture Tepid bath, for fever, II:915 Tequin. See Gatifloxacin Teratogenic agents alcohol, II:1309 birth defects from, I:490 cerebral palsy, II:703 congenital amputation from, II:887 See also Birth defects Teratomas, testicular, V:3256 Terazol. See Topical antifungal drugs Terazosin for BPH, I:129, 130–131 for hypertension, I:129, 130–131 Terbinafine, for fungal infections, I:270 Terbutaline, I:601 Terbutaline sulfate, for premature labor, IV:2701 Terconazole, for candidiasis, II:646 Teres minor, IV:2920 Terfenadine, I:113 Terfenadine, for allergies, I:119 Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase stain, III:1985 Terpin hydrate, for cough, II:942 Tertiary hypothyroidism. See Hypothyroidism Test tube baby. See Fertilization in vitro Testes. See Testicles Testicles abnormalities of testicular surgery for, V:3261–3263 testicular torsion, V:3263–3264 atrophy of, III:2264 with epididymitis, II:1218 in hermaphroditism, III:1846–1847 in hernia repair, III:1626 in hydrocelectomy, III:1685–1686 in hypogonadism, III:1737, 1738 in infertility, III:1826–1827, 1832 in mumps, III:2255 with nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 radiation injuries to, IV:2808 sitz bath for, IV:3061 ultrasound of, IV:2974–2975 undescended, IV:2974, 2975, V:3256 in vasectomy, V:3481 Testicular cancer, V:3256–3260, 3257 alkaline phosphatase and, I:106 3924 alpha fetoprotein with, I:127 beta human chorionic gonadotropin in, IV:3213 brain tumor from, I:574 chemotherapy for, II:639 from choriocarcinoma, II:797 galactorrhea from, III:1375 hydrocele from, III:1686 lactate dehydrogenase isoenzyme test for, III:1940 physical examination for, II:634 self-examination for, V:3260–3261 self-test for, III:2166 sex hormone tests for, IV:3014 sexual dysfunctions from, IV:3016 statistics on, III:2166 superior vena cava syndrome with, IV:3222 testicular surgery for, V:3261, 3262 ultrasound for, IV:2974, 2975 with undescended testes, V:3437 Testicular restraint, for premature ejaculation, IV:2700 Testicular self-examination, V:3260–3261 Testicular surgery, V:3261–3263, V:3263 Testicular torsion, III:2167, V:3263–3264, 3263f scrotal nuclear medicine scan for, IV:2973, 2974 testicular surgery for, V:3261 ultrasound for, IV:2974, 2975 Testis. See Testicles Testolactone, for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:886 Testosterone for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 for gonadtropin deficiency, III:1748 HRT and, III:1669 in hypogonadism, III:1738 with Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1897 menopause and, III:2162 in PCOS, IV:2655 precocious puberty and, IV:2691 production of, V:3256 prostate cancer and, IV:2733 in puberty, IV:2772, 2773 replacement therapy for menopause, III:2162 after vasectomy, V:3482 Testosterone test, IV:3013 Tetanospasmin, muscle spasms from, V:3264 Tetanus, V:3264–3266, 3265 from anaerobic bacteria, I:167 from animal bites, I:206, 498 from body piercing, IV:2599 chest physical therapy for, II:745 with female genital mutilation, II:1307 for human bite infections, III:1678 muscle relaxants for, III:2258, 2259 muscle spasms and cramps from, III:2260 myocarditis from, III:2289 vaccination for, V:3465 vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 Tetanus-diphtheria toxoids for diphtheria, II:1078 for tetanus, V:3265 Tetanus immune globulin from blood transfusions, V:3368 for tetanus, V:3265–3266 Tetanus toxoid in delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1019 immunoelectrophoresis and, III:1788 for rabies, IV:2802 Tetanus vaccine for animal bite infections, I:207, 499–502 for burns, I:618 for clenched fist injury, II:821 for frostbite, II:1372 hives from, III:1642 in pregnancy, V:3466 Tetracaine for hemorrhoids, I:275 for local anesthesia, I:190 with sunscreens, IV:3221 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin. See Dioxin Tetracyclic antidepressants, I:256–258 Tetracyclines, I:241, 242, V:3266–3268 with ACE inhibitors, I:205 for acne, I:25 for actinomycosis, I:35 alanine aminotransferase levels from, III:2024 for anthrax, I:225 with antirheumatic drugs, I:307 for balantidiasis, I:441 for bejel, I:460 birth defects from, I:490 for brucellosis, I:606 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 for conjunctivitis, II:904 for cross infection, III:1675 with dairy products, II:1102 for ehrlichiosis, II:1142 Fanconi’s syndrome from, II:1290 for gastritis, III:1406–1407 for granuloma inguinale, III:1483–1484 for helicobacteriosis, III:1567 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 for inclusion conjunctivitis, III:1811 with isotretinoin, I:229 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 for malaria, III:2090 for melioidosis, III:2151 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for leprosy, III:1979 for macular degeneration, III:2077 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 Thallium, peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2553 Thallium 201 for thallium heart scan, V:3277 Thallium heart scan, V:3277–3279, 3277 for atherosclerosis, I:395 for coronary heart disease, II:930–931 vs. exercise test, IV:3192 vs. technetium heart scan, V:3246 The Biological Basis of Cancer, I:578–579 Thematic Apperception Test, IV:2565, 2764, V:3279–3280 Theo-24. See Theophylline Theo-Dur. See Theophylline Theobromine, I:520 Theolair. See Theophylline Theophrastus, III:1616 Theophylline with anticonvulsants, I:255 for asthma, I:381, 383 with beta blockers, I:477 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 for bronchodilation, I:120 for COPD, II:811 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 heartburn from, III:1553 indigestion from, III:1813 with ipacac, II:1106 as migraine trigger, III:2188 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 with smoking cessation drugs, IV:3111 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:269 Therapeutic abortion, I:9–12 Therapeutic alliance, in psychoanalysis, IV:2761–2762 Therapeutic baths, V:3280–3281, 3280t for chickenpox, II:750–751 after cystoscopy, II:997 dermatitis from, II:1037 for fever, II:1315 for hypothermia, III:1755 for insomnia, III:1845 for proctitis, IV:2719 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for shingles, IV:3032 Therapeutic drug monitoring. See Drug therapy monitoring Therapeutic exercise. See Exercise therapy Therapeutic massage. See Massage Therapeutic plasma exchange. See Plasmapheresis GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Therapeutic touch, V:3281–3284 for brain tumors, I:573 for liver cancer, III:2021 for movement disorders, III:2224 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 The Therapeutic Touch: How to Use Your Hands to Help or to Heal (Krieger), V:3283 Therapist neutrality, IV:2761 Thermal burns. See Burns Thermography, for frostbite, II:1371 Thermotherapy for eye cancer, II:1261 for retinoblastoma, IV:2886 Theta brain wave, II:1152 Thiabendazole for cutaneous larvae migrans, II:975 for parasitic disease, I:273, 275 for strongyloidiasis, V:3293 Thiamin. See Thiamine Thiamine, III:2172, V:3524 for alcohol withdrawal, I:92, 93, 94, 98 for beriberi, I:470 for coma, II:868 for glaucoma, III:1461 for Korsakoff’s syndrome, I:470, III:1931 for lead poisoning, III:1968 for Wernicke’s syndrome, I:93, 94, 98, III:1931 Thiamine deficiency from alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:92, 93, 94, 98 beri-beri from, V:3525 dementia from, II:1025 Korsakoff’s syndrome from, III:1930–1931 from starvation, IV:3161 Wernicke’s syndrome from, I:93, 94, 98 Thiazide diuretics, II:1088 for diabetes insipidus, II:1047 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for hypertension, I:279, 280–281 hyponatremia from, III:1742 for medullary sponge kidney, III:2150 with methenamine, V:3449 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for periodic paralysis, IV:2545 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Thiazides antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with bleeding time test, I:514 hyperlipoproteinemia from, III:1708 hypokalemia from, III:1739 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3312 Thiazolesulfone, G6PD and, III:1465 Thiazolidinediones for diabetes, I:262, 263, IV:2617 Thigh bone. See Femur 3925 Thigh bone with metals, II:1102 for nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 with oral contraceptives, IV:2404 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 for parrot fever, IV:2506 with penicillins, IV:2529 photosensitivity from, III:1715, IV:2589 for plague, IV:2616 for pneumonia, IV:2640 for rat-bite fever, IV:2822 for relapsing fever, IV:2853 for RMSF, IV:2911 for rosacea, IV:2918 for scrub typhus, IV:2977 for syphilis, IV:3229 for trachoma, V:3356 from typhus, V:3423 for vibriosis, V:3507 for Whipple’s disease, III:2086 Tetracyn. See Tetracyclines Tetralogy of Fallot, II:900, V:3268–3270, 3269f with Down syndrome, II:1099 surgery for, III:1543 Tetraplegia. See Quadriplegia Teveten. See Eprosartan Textile dust, byssinosis from, I:622 Thalamic nuclei, in movement disorders, III:2222 Thalamotomy, for tremor, V:3383 Thalamus electric brain stimulation of, II:1146 in Korsakoff’s syndrome, III:1930 lesion of neurologic examination for, IV:2352 Thalassemia, I:181, 184–185, II:1123, V:3270–3277 blood transfusions for, V:3368 bone marrow transplantation for, I:550 fetal hemoglobin test and, II:1313 genetic counseling for, III:1430 haptoglobin test for, III:1510 hemoglobin electrophoresis for, III:1575 as hemoglobinopathy, III:1577–1578 with hemolytic anemia, III:1579, 1580 hypercoagulation from, III:1701 iron tests for, III:1863, 1864 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 red blood cell indices for, IV:2839 splenectomy for, IV:3139 with vibriosis, V:3506 Thalidomide for Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 birth defects from, I:490 congenital amputation from, II:887 Thimerosol Thimerosol, as antiseptic, I:307 Thin layer chromatography, I:149 Thioctic acid, for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 Thiola. See alpha-Mercaptopropionylglycine Thiopental barbiturate-induced coma from, I:443 for general anesthesia, I:187 with nitrous oxide, I:187 Thioridazine for delusions, II:1023 with estrogens, III:1670 for hallucinations, III:1504 for paranoia, IV:2493 for psychosis, I:300, IV:2766 retinopathy and, IV:2891 tardive dyskinesia from, V:3242 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:261 Thiothixene for psychosis, I:300 tardive dyskinesia from, V:3242 Thioxanthene, for psychosis, I:301 Third-degree burns. See Burns Third molars. See Wisdom teeth Third pharyngeal pouch syndrome. See DiGeorge’s syndrome Thirst from diabetes insipidus, II:1047 from diabetes mellitus, II:1049 from diarrhea, II:1066 excessive (See Psychogenic polydipsia) hypernatremia and, III:1710 Thomas collar. See Cervical collar Thoracentesis, V:3284–3286 with chest drainage therapy, II:743 for empyema, II:1176 pleural biopsy after, IV:2627 for pleural effusion, IV:2629, 2630 for pleurisy, IV:2632 pneumothorax from, IV:2641 Thoracic aneurysmectomy. See Aneurysmectomy Thoracic aorta, II:830 Thoracic aortic aneurysm, I:193, 325 Thoracic cancer chest x-ray for, II:747 from chronic leukemia, III:1992 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 Thoracic injuries aortic aneurysm from, I:325 atelectasis from, I:390 atrial fibrillation from, I:407 cardiac tamponade from, II:661 embolism from, II:1169 empyema from, II:1175 from Heimlich maneuver, III:1565 hemoptysis from, III:1589 lung abscess from, III:2039 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 from lymphography, III:2066 3926 pericardial effusion from, IV:2536 pleural effusion from, IV:2629 pulmonary embolism from, IV:2780 respiratory insufficiency from, IV:2866 Thoracic outlet syndrome, V:3286–3287 Thoracic surgery, V:3287–3289 atelectasis from, I:390 vs. balloon valvuloplasty, I:442 deep vein thrombosis after, II:1013 empyema from, II:1175 gas embolism from, III:1396 for hemoptysis, III:1589 pneumothorax and, IV:2642 video-assisted for empyema, II:1177 See also Lung surgery Thoracic vertebrae. See Spine Thoracoscopy, V:3289–3291, 3290f for esophageal cancer, II:1240 with pleural biopsy, IV:2627 Thoracostomy, II:743 Thoracotomy, III:2053, 2054 with lung transplantation, III:2055 with thoracic surgery, V:3288 Thorax chest drainage therapy for, II:743 surgery of (See Thoracic surgery) Thorazine. See Chlorpromazine Thoreau, Henry, as vegetarian, V:3485 Thorium dioxide liver cancer from, III:2019 myelofibrosis from, III:2283 Thorotrast, I:477 Threadworm infection. See Enterobiasis; Strongyloidiasis Three day measles. See Rubella Three-leafed grasse. See Red clover 3TC. See Lamivudine Throat. See Pharynx Throat abscess, I:14, V:3325 Throat cancer. See Pharyngeal cancer Throat culture, V:3293–3295, 3294 for adenoid hyperplasia, I:55 for APSGN, I:48 for diphtheria, II:1077 vs. nasopharyngeal culture, IV:2321 for poliovirus, IV:2649 for scarlet fever, IV:2952 for strep throat, IV:3178, 3223 for tonsillitis, V:3327 Throat infections adenoid hyperplasia from, I:55 cellulitis from, II:684 from genital herpes, III:1441 T & A for, V:3325 Throatwort. See Foxglove Thrombin with coagulation disorders, II:827, 828 in hypercoagulation, III:1701 Thrombin inhibitors, I:250 Thrombocytes. See Blood platelets Thrombocythemia. See Thrombocytosis Thrombocytopenia, II:826, 827–828, 829, V:3295–3296 from alemtuzumab, I:103 from anticancer drugs, I:246 bleeding time test for, I:515 blood transfusions for, V:3368 from E. coli, II:1235 from ganciclovir, I:316 vs. idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 platelet count for, IV:2625 splenectomy for, IV:3139 from Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3544 Thrombocytopenic purpura, II:1235, 1236 Thrombocytosis, V:3296–3298 from phlebotomy, IV:2581 platelet count for, IV:2625 Thromboendarterectomy, IV:2785 Thrombolytic therapy, I:250, IV:2855, V:3298–3300 for embolism, II:1171 for heart attacks, III:1533 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 for stroke, IV:3196 Thrombopenia. See Thrombocytopenia Thrombophlebitis, II:1013–1015, V:3300–3301 after adrenalectomy, I:64 from appendectomy, I:340 from arthroscopy, I:366 from barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 with bowel resection, I:564 from colostomy, II:863 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1165 fibrin split products in, II:1319–1320 from heart valve replacement, III:1552 from HRT, III:1673 impedance phlebography for, III:1800 with manual lymph drainage, II:1136 pulmonary embolism from, II:1169, IV:2780 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3129 from urinary diversion, V:3452 from vagotomy, V:3470 varicose veins from, V:3476 vena cava filter for, IV:2491 venography for, V:3492 from venous access, V:3494 Thromboplastic generation test, II:828 Thrombopoietin, in immunotherapy, III:1792 Thrombosed hemorrhoids. See Hemorrhoids GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in pulmonary embolism, IV:2780 from Raloxifene, IV:2998 from regional anesthesia, I:191 renal artery occlusion from, IV:2855 renal vein (See Renal vein thrombosis) from sclerotherapy, V:3476 after splenectomy, IV:3140 from thrombocytosis, V:3297 from thrombophlebitis, V:3300–3301 TIA from, V:3370 transesophageal echocardiography for, V:3365 Valsalva maneuver and, V:3471 in veins (See Thrombophlebitis) vena cava filter for prevention, V:3490–3491 venography for, V:3492 from ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 from ventricular assist devices, V:3498 vitamin K and, V:3519 vitamin K for, IV:3161 warfarin for, I:408 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, IV:2620 Thrombus, in myxoma, III:2306 Thrush. See Candidiasis Thrush (Mouth disease). See Oral candidiasis Thuja, for gonorrhea, III:1473 Thuja occidentalis. See Thuja Thunderstorms, electric shock injuries from, II:1143 Thyme for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for constipation, II:907 for croup, II:960 for laryngitis, III:1958 for sore throats, IV:3119 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for strep throat, IV:3179 Thyme oil, for RSV, IV:2869 Thymectomy, III:2274 Thymoma, III:2273, 2274, V:3301–3304 Thymoxydiethylamine, I:277 Thymus gland in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 in DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1071, 1072 mediastinoscopy of, III:2143 Thymus gland transplantation, II:1072, III:1785 Thyroid biopsy, V:3304–3306 Thyroid cancer, V:3306–3309, 3307 bone nuclear medicine scan for, I:555 chest x-ray for, II:747 with familial polyposis, II:1287 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647, 1649 physical examination for, II:634 thyroid biopsy for, V:3304, 3305 thyroid hormones for, V:3313 thyroidectomy for, V:3317 See also Cancer Thyroid crisis, III:1724 Thyroid diseases alopecia from, I:125–126 amylase tests for, I:160 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 vs. bipolar disorder, I:487 with blepharoplasty, I:518 carpal tunnel syndrome and, II:667 catecholamines levels with, II:678 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 diarrhea from, II:1066 with digitalis, II:1074 with Down syndrome, II:1099 edema from, II:1134 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 fetal hemoglobin test and, II:1313 vs. generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 growth hormone tests for, III:1487 gynecomastia from, III:1497 for high risk pregnancy, III:1633 from HRT, III:1673 hypothermia from, III:1754 indigestion from, III:1813 itching from, III:1874 vs. mood disorders, III:2216 ophthalmoplegia from, IV:2395 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2551 pernicious anemia from, I:181 from polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 premature menopause from, IV:2702 from rubella, V:3339 thyroid ultrasound for, V:3316 tremor from, V:3381 with vitiligo, V:3527 Thyroid function tests, V:3309–3312 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for anxiety disorder, I:323 for hypothyroidism, III:1757 See also Thyroid scan Thyroid gland autoimmune diseases of, I:422, 423 enlarged (See Goiter) function tests for, V:3309, 3310 vs. parathyroid glands, III:1713 in parathyroidectomy, IV:2497 surgery of, V:3316–3318 in thyroiditis, V:3318 underactive, III:1756–1758 Thyroid gland tumors from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 3927 Thyroid gland tumors Thrombosis angiography for, I:198 anticoagulants for, I:250–252 with arteriovenous fistula, I:356 aspirin for, I:408 from atherosclerosis, I:393 from atrial fibrillation, I:407 in brain craniotomy for, II:946 of the brain exophthalmos from, II:1252 from cardiac catheterization, II:657 with carotid sinus massage, II:667 from Chagas’ disease, II:727 coagulation disorders and, II:827 from cooling treatments, II:915 cor pulmonale from, II:917 from coronary artery bypass grafting, II:928 from coronary heart disease, II:930 with coronary heart disease, II:929 from coronary stents, II:934–935 with Depo-Provera, II:1031–1032 edema from, II:1135 from electric shock injuries, II:1143 vs. embolism, I:355 from endarterectomy, II:1182 with epoetin, II:643 from fasciotomy, II:1292 from frostbite, II:1371 from head injuries, III:1520 heart attacks from, III:1533 with heart biopsy, III:2287 from heart valve replacement, III:1552 with hormone replacement therapy, III:2160 from hypercoagulation, III:1701 impedance phlebography for, III:1800 with infertility drugs, III:1831 ischemia from, III:1869 from joint replacement, III:1892 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 leeches for, III:1970 in legs, II:1013 from life support, III:2001 after liposuction, III:2011 from lung surgery, III:2054 with menorrhagia, II:1112 from mitral valve insufficiency, III:2207 in myxoma, III:2306 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 from orbital and periorbital cellulitis, IV:2408 partial thromboplastin time for, IV:2507 in pelvis, II:1014 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 pleurisy from, IV:2631 from pulmonary artery catheterization, IV:2777 Thyroid gland tumors thyroidectomy for, V:3317 Thyroid hormones, V:3312–3314 with ACE test, I:206 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 with galactorrhea, III:1375 for goiter, III:1471 iodine toxicity and, III:2194 magnesium deficiency from, III:2079 oligomenorrhea from, IV:2388–2389 for Paget’s disease, IV:2456 regulation from, V:3306 tests for in multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236–2237 for thyroiditis, V:3319 in thyroiditis, V:3318 Thyroid radiology, III:1756 Thyroid scan, III:1724, V:3314–3315 Thyroid scintiscan. See Thyroid scan Thyroid-stimulating hormone anaphylaxis from, I:179 goiter from, III:1470 in secondary hypothyroidism, III:1756 Thyroid-stimulating hormone deficiency, III:1746, 1747 Thyroid-stimulating hormone test, V:3309, V:3309–3312, V:3310 for hypothyroidism, III:1757 for thyroid cancer, V:3306 for thyroid-stimulating hormone deficiency, III:1748 Thyroid storm. See Hyperthyroidism; Thyroid crisis Thyroid ultrasonography, V:3315–3316 Thyroidectomy, V:3316–3318 for goiter, III:1471 for hyperthyroidism, III:1725 for multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2237 thyroid biopsy and, V:3305 for thyroid cancer, V:3307–3308 Thyroiditis, I:422, 423, 425, V:3318–3321 from common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 giant cell (See Subacute thyroiditis) thyroxine levels and, V:3310, 3312 See also Autoimmune thyroiditis Thyrotoxicosis, III:1724 thyroxine levels and, V:3312 tremor from, V:3381 Thyrotropin-releasing hormone simulation test, III:1748 Thyroxin. See Thyroxine Thyroxine in goiter, III:1470 in hypothyroidism, III:1756 myopathies from, III:2295 3928 Thyroxine-binding globulin test, V:3309, 3310 Thyroxine test, III:1748, V:3309–3312 TIA. See Transient ischemic attack Tiamterene, for heart attacks, III:1534 Tiapride, for Tourette syndrome, V:3344 TIBC test. See Total iron-binding capacity test Tibia erythema nodosum of, II:1227 in knee replacement, III:1891 in osteochondrosis, IV:2416 sarcomas of, IV:2942 Tibia pin traction, V:3357 Tic disorders movement disorders from, III:2222, 2223 from Tourette’s syndrome, V:3341–3344 Tic douloureux. See Trigeminal neuralgia Ticarcillin-clavulanate, for pseudomonas infectiond, IV:2752 Tick-borne relapsing fever. See Relapsing fever Ticks arbovirus encephalitis from, I:347 babesiosis from, I:433–434 ehrlichiosis from, II:1142 Lyme disease from, III:2057–2061 relapsing fever from, IV:2852, 2853 RMSF from, IV:2910, 2911 trench fever from, V:3383–3384 Ticlid. See Ticlopidine hydrochloride Ticlopidine, I:250 Ticlopidine hydrochloride, V:3372 Tics. See Tic disorders Tietze syndrome, II:940 TIG. See Tetanus immune globulin Tigran, IV:2812 Tilt table test, V:3321–3322 Tiludronate, for Paget’s disease, IV:2456 Timentin. See Ticarcillin-clavulanate Timolol, I:475 with calcium channel blockers, II:628 for glaucoma, III:1459 for heart attacks, III:1534 Timoptic. See Timolol Tinactin. See Tolnaftate Tinbergen, Nikolaas, I:103 Tinder plant. See Mullein Tinea, IV:2908–2910, 2909 foot care with, II:1357 KOH test for, III:1929 systemic antifungal drugs for, I:267 Tinea capitis antifungal drugs for, I:270 KOH test for, III:1929 Tinea cruris, III:1929 Tinea pedis. See Athlete’s foot Tinea unguium. See Onychomycosis Tinea versicolor, III:1929 Tinnevelly senna. See Senna Tinnitus, V:3322–3324 from acoustic neuroma, I:28, 30 from aminoglycosides, I:151 from ceruman impaction, II:709 from dizziness, II:1095 hearing loss from, III:1528–1529 from Meniere’s disease, III:2151 from otosclerosis, IV:2436 from perforated eardrum, IV:2534 stapedectomy for, IV:3156 Tioconazole for candidiasis, II:646 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 TIPS. See Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt; Transvenous intrahepatic portosystemic shunt Tirofiban, as antiplatelet agent, I:250 Tisserand, Robert, I:349 Tissue amebicides. See Amebicides Tissue death. See Necrosis Tissue expanders, I:587 Tissue freezing, II:1370–1371 Tissue infarction, IV:2855 Tissue plasminogen activator for heart attacks, III:1533–1534 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3298 Tissue preservation, V:3377–3378 Tissue tests for roundworm infections, IV:2924 for toxocariasis, IV:2924 Tissue therapy. See Cell therapy Tissue typing. See Histocompatibility testing Tissues damage to from anoxia, I:217 from cooling treatments, II:915 from episiotomy, II:1223 from venography, V:3493 irritation of with smoke inhalation, IV:3102 sample of (See Biopsy) Titanium dioxide, for sunburn prevention, I:620 Titmus II Vision Tester, II:860 Tizanidine, as muscle relaxant, III:2259 TM. See Transcendental meditation TMJ. See Temporomandibular joint disorders TMP/SMX. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole TN. See Trigeminal neuralgia TNF. See Tumor necrosis factor TNF-a. See Tumor necrosis factor TNM system, tumor removal and, V:3416 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 MEN tumors on, III:2236 neurologic examination of, IV:2352 in oral hygiene, IV:2405 in speech disorders, IV:3122, 3123, 3124 Tongue cancer, III:1515–1519, IV:2808 Tongue grass. See Chickweed de Toni-Fanconi syndrome. See Fanconi’s syndrome Tonic torticollis. See Torticollis Tonics (Herbal medicine), III:1618–1919 Tonometry, II:1264, III:1458–1459 Tonsil cancer. See Mouth cancer Tonsillectomy, V:3325–3326 for adenoid hyperplasia, I:55 endocarditis from, II:1183 laser surgery for, III:1960 polio and, IV:2648 for sleep apnea, IV:2598 velopharyngeal insufficiency from, V:3489 Tonsillitis, V:3326–3329, 3326f, 3327, 3328 cephalosporins for, II:692 erythromycins for, II:1232 with glomerulonephritis, III:1462 from Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 rheumatic fever and, IV:3223 sore throat from, IV:3118 strep throat and, IV:3177 streptococcal antibody tests for, IV:3180 T & A for, V:3325 Tonsils in acute leukemia, III:1987 malocclusion from, III:2106 speech disorders from, IV:3122, 3125 T & A for, V:3325 Tooth abscess brain abscess from, I:566 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 Tooth cancer. See Mouth cancer Tooth care. See Oral hygiene Tooth decay. See Dental caries Tooth diseases laser surgery for, III:1960 malocclusion from, III:2106 Tooth enamel, celiac disease and, II:682 Tooth extraction, IV:2406, V:3332–3334, 3333 endocarditis from, II:1183 for impacted tooth, III:1799–1800 for malocclusion, III:2107 vs. root canal therapy, IV:2914 for toothache, V:3337 Tooth fractures, II:1029, V:3334 Tooth injuries, II:1029 Tooth loss, I:609, II:1029 Tooth pain. See Toothache Tooth replacement, V:3334–3336 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Tooth replantation, II:1030 Tooth restoration. See Dental restoration Toothache, V:3336–3338 acetaminophen for, I:18 aspirin for, I:378 vs. cluster headache, II:824 local anesthesia for, I:190 root canal therapy for, IV:2914 Toothbrushing, IV:2405 Topamax. See Topiramate Tophi. See Tophus Tophus, III:1477 Topical antibiotics, I:244–246 for acne, I:25 for blepharitis and stye, II:1272 for circumcision, II:814 for furunculosis, I:537 for lacrimal duct obstruction, III:1938, 1939 for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for mastoidectomy, III:2133 for nail removal, IV:2309–2310 with nasal packing, IV:2313 for otitis externa, IV:2432 for rosacea, IV:2917–2918 for skin lesions, IV:3076 for wound repair, III:1936–1937 Topical antifungal drugs, I:267, I:270–271 for athlete’s foot, I:399 for balanitis, I:440 for candidiasis, II:646 for folliculitis, II:1352 for skin lesions, IV:3076 Topical chemotherapy. See Chemotherapy Topiramate, for convulsions, I:253 Toradol. See Ketorolac TORCH panel. See TORCH test TORCH syndrome, V:3338–3340 TORCH test, II:703, V:3338–3340 Torches. See Mullein Toric lenses, for astigmatism, I:386 Torticollis, III:2222, V:3340–3341 Tortulomas, II:965 Torular meningitis. See Cryptococcosis Torulosis. See Cryptococcosis Total hip replacement. See Hip replacement arthroplasty Total hysterectomy. See Hysterectomy Total iron-binding capacity test, III:1863, 1864 Total joint arthroplasty. See Joint replacement Total kidney failure. See Chronic kidney failure Total laryngectomy. See Laryngectomy Total lung capacity, II:1173 Total mastectomy. See Mastectomy 3929 Total mastectomy Tobacco, chewing, IV:3104 Tobacco smoking. See Smoking Tobacco wood. See Witch hazel Tobramycin, I:150, 151 for enterobacterial infections, II:1206 for eye infections, I:243–244 hearing loss from, III:1528 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2752 Tobrex. See Tobramycin Tocolytics, for premature membrane rupture, IV:2705 Tocopherol. See Vitamin E alpha-Tocopherol. See Vitamin E Todd, Mabel Elsworth, III:2226 Toes abnormalities of, II:923 from hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 amputation of from diabetes mellitus, II:1052 big (See Hallux) bursitis of, I:620 with juvenile arthritis, III:1894 reattachment leeches for, III:1971 Tofranil. See Imipramine Tofu, for menopause, III:2162 Toilet training, with vesicoureteral reflux, V:3505 Tolazamide, for diabetes mellitus, I:262, II:1051 Tolbutamide with bismuth subsalicylate, I:266 for diabetes mellitus, II:1051 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:270 Tolcapone, for Parkinson disease, I:296 Tolerance-fading memory, I:416 Tolmetin, aspirin allergy and, I:378 Tolnaftate for athlete’s foot, I:399 for fungal infections, I:270 for tinea, IV:2908 See also Topical antifungal drugs Tolosa-Hunt syndrome. See Ophthalmoplegia Tolstoy, Leo, as vegetarian, V:3485 Toluene, peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552 Toluidine blue, III:1465 Tomatis, Alfred, I:415, 416 Tomatis method. See Auditory integration training Tomatoes, poisoning from, IV:2643, 2644 Tomography. See Positron emission tomography Tongue in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, III:1622 with mastectomy, III:2133 Total nodal radiation therapy Total nodal radiation therapy, III:1646 Total pancreatectomy. See Pancreatectomy Total parotidectomy. See Parotidectomy Total serum cholesterol, II:792–794 Total serum IgE, I:118 Total-skin electron beam therapy. See Radiation therapy Touch, III:1503, 1504 Touch therapy. See Therapeutic touch Tourette, Gilles de la, V:3341 Tourette syndrome, V:3341–3345 movement disorders from, III:2221 obsessive-compulsive disorder and, IV:2381 PET scan for, IV:2677 Tourniquets, V:3582 Toxemia maternal mental retardation from, III:2174–2175 neonatal magnesium deficiency from, III:2079 with respiratory distress syndrome, IV:2863 uric acid tests for, V:3442 Toxic adenoma, V:3312 Toxic cataracts, II:673 Toxic encephalopathy. See Delirium Toxic epidermal necrolysis, I:242, V:3345–3346 Toxic hepatitis. See Alcohol-induced hepatitis; Drug-induced hepatitis Toxic megacolon from antibiotic-associated colitis, I:238 from travelers diarrhea, V:3379 from ulcerative colitis, V:3430, 3431 Toxic nodular adenoma, V:3312 Toxic oxygen, vitamin E deficiency and, V:3518 Toxic plants, IV:2643–2644, 2645 Toxic shock syndrome, IV:3005, 3182, V:3346–3348 autopsy for, I:425 from diaphragms, II:1064 from staphylococcus, IV:3157 vs. strep throat, IV:3178 Toxic thyroid adenoma, V:3310, 3312 Toxicodendron for contact dermatitis, I:121, II:910 for influenza, III:1835 for low back pain, III:2033 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for shingles, IV:3032 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 Toxins activated charcoal for, I:367–368, II:732–733 in acute kidney failure, I:44 bacterial (See Bacterial toxins) birth defects from, I:490 3930 botulinum (See Botulinum toxins) bronchiectasis from, I:596 catecholamines levels with, II:677 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 environmental (See Environmental toxins) in flesh-eating disease, II:1336 in food (See Food-borne toxins) hiccups from, III:1631 from insecticides (See Insecticide poisoning) interstitial lung diseases from, III:1773, 1774, 1775 kidney damage from, IV:2337 liver function for, III:1880 miscarriage from, III:2204 nasogastric suction for, IV:2320 paralysis from, IV:2491 paresthesia from, IV:2365 polydactyly and syndactyly from, IV:2661 pulmonary edema from, IV:2778 sideroblastic anemia from, IV:3048 urinalysis for, V:3445 Toxocariasis, IV:2924 Toxoids tetanus-diphtheria (See Tetanusdiphtheria toxoids) Toxoplasma gondii birth defects from, I:491 vs. LCM, III:2069 toxoplasmosis from, V:3348 Toxoplasmosis, V:3348–3350 with AIDS, I:76 creatine kinase test for, II:948 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 vs. Kawasaki syndrome, III:1901 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 maternal mental retardation from, III:2174 polyhydramnios from, IV:2664 stillbirth from, IV:3163 TORCH test for, V:3338 uveitis from, V:3461 visual impairment from, V:3510 Toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes test, II:703 TPA. See Tissue plasminogen activator Trabecular meshwork, III:1458 Trabeculectomy, V:3350–3351 Trabeculoplasty for glaucoma, III:1459 trabeculectomy after, V:3351 Trace elements, IV:3234 Trace minerals. See Minerals Trachea with esophageal atresia, II:1238 with goiter, III:1470 in hiccups, III:1631 injuries of choking from, II:772 in laryngeal cancer, III:1516 in laryngitis, III:1957 in lung biopsy, III:2041 with lung transplantation, III:2055 with nasogastric suctioning, IV:2320 obstruction of choking from, II:772 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1564–1566 Tracheal intubation. See Intubation Tracheitis, II:960 Tracheoesophageal fistula, II:1238, V:3351–3352 Tracheoesophageal puncture, IV:3124 Tracheoesophageal speech with head and neck cancer, III:1518 after laryngectomy, III:1956 Tracheostomy for botulism, I:561 for epiglottitis, II:1220 for hypopnea, IV:3092 with mechanical ventilation, III:1840 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3039 for sleep apnea, IV:3085, 3092 for stridor, IV:3194 vs. tracheotomy, V:3352 for vocal cord paralysis, V:3531 Tracheotomy, V:3352–3355, 3353f for choking, II:773 for laryngeal cancer, III:1952 with laryngectomy, III:1955 in life support, III:1999 Trachoma, V:3355–3356, 3356 corneal ulcers from, II:922 visual impairment from, V:3510 Trackleberry. See Bilberry Traction, V:3357–3359, 3358f cervical for cervical disk disease, II:718 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for fractures, II:1360, 1365 for herniated disk, III:1629 immobilization and, III:1782 by orthopedic surgeons, IV:2410 with spinal instrumentation, IV:3134 for whiplash, V:3556 Traction diverticula. See Diverticulum, esophageal Traditional Chinese medicine. See Chinese traditional medicine Traditional Indian medicine. See Ayurvedic medicine Traffic accidents concussion from, II:878 gangrene from, III:1394 head injuries from, III:1519 kyphosis from, III:1932 maxillofacial trauma from, III:2136 pelvic fractures from, IV:2520 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Transcendental meditation, III:2146–2147, 2148 Transcervical chorionic villi sampling, II:799 Transcortical aphasia, I:334 Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography, V:3363–3364 Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation. See Electrical nerve stimulation Transderm-nitro. See Nitroglycerin Transesophageal echocardiography, V:3364–3366 Transference, in psychoanalysis, IV:2761–2762 Transferrin tests, III:1681, 1863, 1864–1865 Transfusion hepatitis. See Hepatitis C Transfusions, blood. See Blood transfusions Transgender health. See Gay and lesbian health Transglutaminase-1 gene, III:1772 Transhepatic biliary catheterization, V:3369–3370 Transient aphasia. See Aphasia Transient aplastic crisis, II:1329 Transient global amnesia, I:152, 153 Transient hypogammaglobulinemia, III:1790 Transient insomnia, III:1843 Transient ischemic attack, III:1868, V:3370–3373 amnesia from, I:152 fainting from, II:1280 paresthesia from, IV:2365 before stroke, IV:3195 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3202 from temporal arteritis, V:3247–3248 Transillumination for hydroceles, III:1686 for sinusitis, IV:3058 Transitional cell carcinoma, III:1909 Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt, I:517 Translocation, II:1098, 1100 Transluminal extraction atherectomy, I:392 Transmissible mink encephalopathy. See Spongiform encephalopathy Transmission based precautions. See Universal precautions Transplant reaction screening test, II:998 Transplantation bone marrow (See Bone marrow transplantation) fibrin split products and, II:1319–1320 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 histocompatibility testing for, V:3324–3325 in life support, III:2000 lung (See Lung transplantation) shingles and, IV:3032 TB tests and, V:3402 Transposition of the great arteries, II:900, III:1543, V:3373–3374 Transrectal ultrasonography for anal cancer, I:170 for prostate cancer, IV:2731 Transsexualism. See Gender identity disorder Transtelephonic monitoring. See Ambulatory electrocardiography Transurethral bladder resection, I:508, V:3374–3375 Transurethral incision, II:1203 Transurethral needle ablation, II:1203 Transurethral resection procedure for benign prostatic hyperplasia, IV:2737–2739 for prostate cancer, IV:2731 Transurethral vaporization, II:1203 Transvaginal ultrasonography for endometrial cancer, II:1190 for ovarian cancer, IV:2441 for pregnancy, I:220, IV:2526 Transvaginalultrasonography, II:1190 Transvenous intrahepatic portosystemic shunt, IV:2676, 2677 Transverse colon. See Colon Transverse deficiency. See Ectromelia Transverse fractures. See Fracture lines Transverse myelitis, V:3375–3376 Transvestic fetishism. See Gender identity disorder Transvestism, IV:3018 Tranxene. See Clorazepate Tranylcypromine, I:256–257 with anticonvulsants, I:255 with antihemorrhoid agents, I:275 with antihistamines, I:278 with antimigraine agents, I:291 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 with beta blockers, I:477 for bipolar disorder, I:488 with bronchodilators, I:602 with decongestants, II:1012 for depression, II:1035, III:2213 with dicyclomine, I:309 for mood disorders, III:2217 with opioid analgesics, I:178 for phobias, IV:2583 for seasonal affective disorder, IV:2980 Trapeze, during traction, V:3358 Trapezius, IV:2352 Trapped head, in childbirth, I:594 Trappist Monks, vegetarianism and, V:3485 Trauma. See Injuries 3931 Trauma whiplash from, V:3555 wounds from, V:3581 Trager, Milton, V:3362 Trager Institute, V:3361, 3362 Trager psychophysical integration therapy, III:2225, V:3361–3363 Training. See Education and training TRAM flap. See Surgical flaps Trandate. See Labetolol Tranquilizers amenorrhea from, I:146, 147 with anticonvulsants, I:253, 255 for anxiety, I:320 for atopic dermatitis, I:404 for autism, I:420 with barbiturates, I:445 with benzodiazepines, I:467, 469 choking from, II:773 with cisapride, I:273 with cystoscopy, II:996 with dicyclomine, I:309 for dissociative disorders, II:1087 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 with dronabinol, II:644 erection disorders with, IV:3051 female sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 galactorrhea from, III:1375 for generalized anxiety disorder, III:1428 for heart attacks, III:1534 in HRT, III:1669 with hydroxyzine, I:285 impotence from, III:1805 for insomnia, III:1844 with interferons, III:1793 for lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for mania, III:2113 with MAO inhibitors, III:2214, 2215 with opioid analgesics, I:178 overdose, II:1104–1105 photosensitivity from, IV:2589 with prochlorperazine, I:293 for reflex sympathetic dystrophy, IV:2840 for shingles, IV:3032 with SSRIs, I:258 for stress, IV:3186 stuttering and, IV:3199 tracheotomy and, V:3355 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 urinary incontinence from, V:3455 with zolpidem, I:284 Transabdominal chorionic villi sampling, II:800 Transaminase stimulation test, V:3514 Transaminases alkaline phosphatase and, I:106 tests for, III:2024–2027 vitamin B6 and, V:3513–3514 with vitamin B6 deficiency, V:3513–3514 Traumatic amputation Traumatic amputation, III:1393, V:3376–3378, 3377 Traumatic brain injuries from head injuries, III:1519–1523 rehabilitation for, IV:2846, 2847 subarachnoid hemorrhage from, IV:3201, 3204 vegetative state from, V:3488 Traumatic cataracts, II:673 Traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage. See Subarachnoid hemorrhage Travatan, for glaucoma, III:1459 Travel antibiotic prophylaxis for, IV:2727 balantidiasis from, I:441 decompression sickness and, II:1009 dehydration from, II:1017 with edema, II:1135 enterobacterial infections from, II:1205 filariasis from, II:1330 fluke infection from, II:1343 FUO and, II:1318 giardiasis from, III:1450 hepatitis A from, III:1596, 1597 hepatitis E from, III:1608 infection control and, III:1822 Japanese encephalitis from, III:1879, 1880 lymphogranuloma venereum from, III:2071 with malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 malaria from, I:286, III:2088, 2091 melioidosis from, III:2150 plague and, IV:2614, 2616 strongyloidiasis and, V:3291, 3292 tapeworm disease from, V:3240 vaccination for, V:3466 Traveler’s diarrhea, II:1066, V:3378–3381 from E. coli, II:1235 from giardiasis, III:1450 from shigella, II:1354, IV:3027, 3029–3030 sulfonamides for, IV:3216 Trazodone with buspirone, IV:3111 for depression, II:1035 for pain management, IV:2463 for sleep disorders, IV:3091 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:259 Trecator-SC. See Ethionamide Trefoil. See Red clover Trematodes in fluke infections, II:1342 schistosomiasis from, IV:2954 Tremor, V:3381–3383 from acoustic neuroma, I:29 beta blockers for, I:474 botulinum toxin injections for, I:558 3932 electric brain stimulation for, II:1146 from fluoroquinolones, II:1346 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 from hyperthyroidism, III:1724 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 movement disorders from, III:2222 from multiple sclerosis, III:2250 nerve from shingles, IV:3033 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 from tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3395 Tremor control therapy, V:3382–3383 Trench fever, I:434, V:3383–3384 See also Bacillary angiomatosis Trench mouth. See Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis Trental. See Pentoxifylline Trephining, II:1333 Treponema carateum, IV:2603 Treponema pallidum in bejel, I:460 syphilis from, IV:2817 TORCH syndrome from, V:3338 yaws from, V:3589 Treponema pertenue. See Treponema pallidum Treponematosis. See Yaws Tretinoin for acne, I:25–26, 226–228 congenital brain defects from, II:891 for keratosis pilaris, III:1907 with minoxidil, III:2202 for neuroblastoma, IV:2342 for skin resurfacing, IV:3080 for warts, V:3549 Trexan. See Naltrexone Triacetin, for fungal infections, I:270 Triamcinolone acetate, for angiomas, I:495 Triamcinolone acetonide, for asthma, I:601 Triaminic. See Antihistamines Triamterene for edema, II:1088 hyperkalemia from, III:1705 hypokalemia from, III:1739 Triangular relationships, in family therapy, II:1289 Triatominae, II:727 Triazolam for central nervous system depression, II:689 with grapefruit juice, II:1102 for insomnia, I:282 with opioid analgesics, I:178 Triceps, in movement disorders, III:2222 Trich. See Trichomoniasis Trichiasis, III:1938 Trichinosis, V:3384–3387, 3385 creatine kinase test for, II:948 eyelid edema from, II:1271 Trichloroacetic acid for anal warts, I:173 for genital warts, III:1445 for papillomavirus, IV:2542 for warts, V:3549 Trichomonas vaginalis, IV:2817, IV:2819, V:3387, 3540 Trichomoniasis,V:3387–3388, 3388, 3389, V:3540 balanitis with, I:440 condom use and, II:882 gay and lesbian health and, III:1416 from rape and sexual assault, IV:2817, 2819 Trichophyton in delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1019 in skin infections, I:270 Trichophyton mentagrophytes, I:398 Trichophyton rubrum, I:398 Trichotillomania, I:125, III:1807–1808, IV:2381 Trichuriasis, I:273–274, 275, IV:2924 Triclabendazole, for fluke infection, II:1344 Tricor. See Fenofibrate Tricuspid atresia, II:900, III:1543 Tricuspid regurgitation. See Tricuspid valve insufficiency Tricuspid valve cardiac catheterization for, II:656 in congenital heart disease, II:900 replacement of, III:1550–1552 Tricuspid valve insufficiency, V:3388–3389, 3389, 3472 from endocarditis, II:1183 heart valve repair for, III:1550 Tricuspid valve stenosis, I:442, V:3390, V:3472 Tricyclic antidepressants, I:256–258, I:258–261 for ADHD, I:412 with anticonvulsants, I:254, 255 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 for anxiety, I:321 for bipolar disorder, I:487 with bronchodilators, I:602 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 cholestasis from, II:783 constipation from, II:906 with decongestants, II:1012 for dementia, II:1026 for depression, II:1034 diabetes mellitus from, II:1049 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 gender differences and, IV:2573 indigestion from, III:1813 with ipacac, II:1106 with MAO inhibitors, II:1102, III:2215 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 G6PD and, III:1465 for hemophilus infections, III:1587 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1974 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 for melioidosis, III:2151 for meningococcemia, III:2158 neutropenia from, IV:2354 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for plague, IV:2616 for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636–2637 for pneumonia prevention, IV:2640 for prostatitis, IV:2741 for pyelonephritis, IV:2790 serum sickness from, IV:3008 for toxoplasmosis, V:3349 Trimethoprim-sulfonamide for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for travelers diarrhea, V:3380 Trimethoxybenzeneethanamine. See Mescaline Trimethoxypheneltylamine. See Mescaline 3,4,5 Trimethoxypheneltylamine. See Mescaline Trimethylpsoralen, for vitiligo, IV:3078 Trimox. See Amoxicillin Trinitrotoluene, III:1465 Trinucleotide sequence, III:2301, 2302 Triple antibiotic ointment, I:244 Triple check blood test, I:127 Triple marker screening for birth defects, II:800 in pregnancy, IV:2697 Triple repeat in Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1369, 1370 in muscular dystrophy, III:2262 Triple therapy, for helicobacteriosis, III:1567–1568 Triplets, III:2247 Triploidy, IV:2661 Triptorelin for precocious puberty, IV:2691 Trismus. See Tetanus Trisomy, II:891 Trisomy 13. See Patau’s syndrome Trisomy 18. See Edwards’ syndrome Trisomy 21. See Down syndrome Trisomy-21. See Down syndrome Tritentine hydrochloride, Wilson disease and, V:3566 Trofranil. See Imipramine Troglitizone, for diabetes mellitus, II:1051 Troleandomycin, I:242 Trophoblast cells, II:796 Trophozoites in amebiasis, I:143 in balantidiasis, I:441 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Tropia. See Strabismus Tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3394–3395 Tropical sprue. See Celiac disease Troponin test, V:3395–3397 vs. aspartate aminotransferase test, I:374 for heart attack, III:1940 Trousseau’s sign, II:1155 Trovafloxacin, for antibiotic prophylaxis, IV:2726 Trovan. See Trovafloxacin True sage. See Sage True unicorn root. See Aletrius farinosa Truncal vagotomy. See Vagotomy Trypanosoma brucei, IV:3093–3094 Trypanosoma cruzi, II:727 Trypanosomiasis, IV:3093–3094 Trypsin for autoimmune diseases, I:424 in celiac disease, IV:3173 Tryptophan for Hartnup disease, III:1512 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 TS. See Tourette syndrome Tsetse fly, IV:3093–3094 TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone TSH tests. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone test TSS. See Toxic shock syndrome Tsutsugamushi disease. See Scrub typhus TT. See Therapeutic touch; Tuberculoid leprosy TT (Therapeutic touch), V:3281–3284 TTP. See Thrombocytopenic purpura Tubal ligation, V:3397–3399, 3398f laparoscopy for, III:1947 for ovarian cancer, IV:2442 vs. vasectomy, V:3482 Tubal pregnancy. See Ectopic pregnancy Tubal sterilization for contraception, II:911 ectopic pregnancy from, II:1131 Tube compression, V:3399–3400 Tube feeding. See Enteral nutrition Tuberculin skin test, III:2277, V:3402–3405, V:3407 Tuberculinic miasm. See Miasms Tuberculoid leprosy, III:1978 Tuberculosis, IV:2408, V:3405–3410 Addison’s disease from, I:53 with AIDS, I:76–77 aminoglycosides for, I:150 anorectal fistula with, I:210 ascites from, I:371 with bronchiectasis, I:596 bronchoscopy for, I:603 chest drainage therapy for, II:743 with chest physical therapy, II:745 3933 Tuberculosis for migraine prevention, III:2189 with opioid analgesics, I:178 for pain, IV:2460 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for paraphilias, IV:3019 platelet aggregation test and, IV:2623 for sleep apnea, IV:3085 with zolpidem, I:284 See also Amitriptyline Trifluoperazine HCI, V:3242 Trifluorothymidine, III:1442 Trifocal lenses, II:1266 Trifocals. See Eyeglasses Trifolium partense. See Red clover Trifolium pratense. See Red clover Trigeminal nerve pain from, IV:2339–2340 in trigeminal neuralgia, V:3390 Trigeminal neuralgia, IV:2339–2340, V:3390–3392, 3391f Trigeminal neuropathy, II:1146 Trigger finger. See Tenosynovitis Trigger points, II:1327 Trigger-zone breast pain, II:1323 Triglycerides, II:786–788 in atherosclerosis, I:394 in coronary heart disease, II:930 with diuretics, II:1089 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706 with isotretinoin, I:228 lipase and, III:2002 lipoproteins test for, III:2006–2007 tests for, II:792, V:3393–3394 Trigonella foenum-graecum. See Fenugreek Trihexyphenidyl, for PSP, IV:2722 Triiodothyronine, tests for, V:3309–3312 Triiodothyronine resin uptake tests, V:3309, 3310 Trilisate. See Salicylates Trillium pendulum. See Birthroot Trilostane, for Cushing’s syndrome, II:973 Trimacinolone, II:936 Trimethoprim electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 for food poisoning, II:1355–1356 kidney damage from, IV:2337 for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, II:730, IV:3216 for acne, I:25 for AIDS, I:80 with alemtuzumab, I:102 with antirheumatic drugs, I:307 for brucellosis, I:606 for cyclosporiasis, II:982 for cystitis, II:993 for food poisoning, II:1355–1356 Tuberculosis chest x-ray for, II:748 cough from, II:941 delayed hypersensitivity test for, II:1019 drugs for (See Antituberculosis drugs) erythema nodosum from, II:1227 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 vs. fluke infection, II:1343 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 with hemoptysis, III:1589 histoplasmosis with, III:1640 from human bites, I:498 hyperhidrosis from, III:1704 hypersplenism from, III:1718 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 keratitis from, III:1905 kyphosis from, III:1932 laryngitis and, III:1957 liver biopsy for, III:2017 lung biopsy for, III:2040, 2042 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 with measles, III:2139 meningitis from, III:2154 vs. mycobacterial infections, III:2276 myocarditis from, III:2289 vs. nocardiosis, IV:2358 perforated septum from, IV:2535 pericarditis from, IV:2536, 2538 from peritonitis, IV:2489 pernicious anemia from, IV:2558 pleural biopsy for, IV:2627 pleural effusion from, IV:2628, 2629, 2630 pleurisy from, IV:2631 pneumothorax from, IV:2641 prostatitis from, IV:2740 pulmonary fibrosis from, III:1774 with silicosis, IV:3055 vs. South American blastomycosis, IV:3121 vs. sporotrichosis, IV:3143 sputum culture for, IV:3149, 3150 substance abuse and, IV:3209 superior vena cava syndrome from, IV:3222 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1890 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 with uveitis, V:3461 vaccination for, V:3465 Tuberculosis BCG vaccine. See BCG vaccine Tuberculous meningitis. See Tuberculosis Tuberculous pericarditis. See Tuberculosis Tuberculous peritonitis. See Tuberculosis Tuberous sclerosis, I:569 Tubo-ovarian abscesses, IV:2521, 2523–2524 Tubular reabsorption, V:3445 Tucks, for episiotomy, II:1223 3934 Tui na. See Massage Tui na, III:2033 Tularemia, V:3410–3412 lymphadenitis from, III:2064 vs. paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 Tumbler’s cure all. See Arnica Tumbleweed, I:111 Tumeric. See Turmeric Tumeric root. See Goldenseal Tummy tuck flap. See Surgical flaps Tumor lysis syndrome, I:103 Tumor markers, V:3412–3415 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 blood tests for, II:634 for colon cancer, II:851 for rectal cancer, IV:2829 sex hormone tests for, IV:3013 for testicular cancer, V:3257–3258 Tumor necrosis factor with Crohn’s disease, II:958 gene therapy and, III:1422 with rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 Tumor necrosis factor-alpha. See Tumor necrosis factor Tumor removal, II:634–635, V:3415–3417, 3415, 3416f as cancer therapy, II:638–639, 641 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2344 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 for laryngeal cancer, IV:3124 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2579 for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 Tumor suppressor genes CDKN2A, III:2096 in multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236 Tumor vaccines, I:573 Tumors abdominal (See Abdominal tumors) with acromegaly, I:33 ACTH-producing, II:938 adrenal gland (See Adrenal gland tumors) alkaline phosphatase and, I:107 angiography for, I:197 antidiuretic hormone test and, I:266 atelectasis from, I:390 benign (See Benign tumors) bone (See Bone, tumors of) brain (See Brain tumors) breast (See Breast tumors) CAT scan for, II:875 cholangitis from, II:774 cholestasis from, II:783 CT scans for, II:969 desmoid, II:1287 dizziness from, II:1095 dysmenorrhea from, III:2170 ear, II:1123 edema from, II:1135 EGD for, II:1246 extragonadal (See Extragonadal tumors) eye (See Eye tumors) vs. facial paralysis, I:461 galactorrhea from, III:1375 in gastric emptying disorders, III:1401 germ cell, II:797 vs. goiter, III:1470 gynecomastia from, III:1497 hearing loss from, III:1528 heart (See Heart tumors) hemoptysis from, III:1589 hemorrhoids from, I:275 hiccups from, III:1632 hirsutism from, III:1637 hyperaldosteronism from, III:1694 hypersplenism from, III:1718 intestinal obstruction from, III:1848 intracardiac, III:2306 intravenous urography for, III:1855 from Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1898 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 laser surgery for, III:1959, 1960 liver (See Liver tumors) vs. lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 malignant (See Cancer) meningeal, V:3502 from multiple endocrine neoplasia, III:2236–2237 from mycetoma, III:2275 nervous system (See Nervous system tumors) neuroendocrine, IV:2343–2344 from oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 orbital, II:1252 pancreatic (See Pancreatic tumors) paralysis from, IV:2491 parathyroid (See Parathyroid tumors) pelvic (See Pelvic tumors) pituitary (See Pituitary tumors) retrograde cystography for, IV:2892, 2893 skin (See Skin tumors) skull x-rays for, IV:3082, 3083 spinal cord (See Spinal cord tumors) spinal instrumentation for, IV:3133 from telangiectasia, I:388 thyroid gland (See Thyroid gland tumors) tricuspid valve stenosis from, V:3390 trigeminal neuralgia from, V:3391 ultrasonography for, I:1–2, IV:2525, 2527 urinalysis for, V:3445 uterine, IV:2982 vaccines for (See Tumor vaccines) from yaws, V:3589 Tums. See Antacids Tuning fork with neurologic examination, IV:2352 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Type I fasciitis. See Flesh-eating disease Type I Gulf War syndrome. See Gulf War syndrome Type I schizophrenia. See Schizophrenia Type II diabetes mellitus. See Diabetes mellitus Type II fasciitis. See Flesh-eating disease Type II Gulf War syndrome. See Gulf War syndrome Type II schizophrenia. See Schizophrenia Type III Gulf War syndrome. See Gulf War syndrome Type IV collagen, III:1475 Typhoid, V:3421–3422, 3421 vs. enterobacterial infections, II:1205 perforated septum from, IV:2535 vs. scrub typhus, IV:2976 vaccination for, V:3465 Typhoid fever. See Typhoid Typhoid vaccine allergic purpura from, I:110 with antimalarials, I:288 Typhus, V:3423–3424 from lice, III:1995 vs. paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 Tyramine with MAOIs, I:258, 488, II:1035, 1102, 1103, 1104 Tyrosinase test, I:90–91 Tyrosine in albinism, I:90 for cocaine addiction, II:833 urinalysis for, V:3446 Tyrosinemia, II:1290, 1291 Tyrosinosis, I:149 Tzanck preparation, V:3424–3425 U Ulcer surgery, V:3427–3429, 3427f Ulcerative colitis, V:3429–3431, 3430 activated charcoal for, I:368, II:731 angiography for, I:198 with antihelminthic drugs, I:275 azathioprine for, III:1796 colon cancer from, II:849 colonoscopy for, II:856 vs. Crohn’s disease, II:956, 957, 958 with dicyclomine, I:309 enterostomy for, II:1209 vs. IBS, III:1866 in pregnancy, III:1632, 1633 preventive surgery for, II:635 from proctitis, I:210 proctitis from, IV:2719 uveitis from, V:3461 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Ulcerative coloitis sigmoidoscopy for, IV:3049–3051 Ulceroglandular tularemia, V:3411 Ulcers amebic, I:143 with antihelminthic drugs, I:275 with antihistamines, I:278 antrectomy and vagotomy for, III:1398 with aspirin, I:378 with cross infection, III:1674 decubitus (See Decubitus ulcer) in diabetic foot, II:1053, 1054 digestive, V:3431–3435, 3433, 3434 duodenal (See Peptic ulcer) EGD for, II:1246 erythromycins for, II:1232 esophageal pH monitoring and, II:1246 FOBT for, II:1302 gastric (See Stomach ulcer) in gastric emptying disorders, III:1401 genital (See Genital ulcers) vs. granuloma inguinale, III:1483 from Helicobacter pylori, III:1566–1568 laser surgery for, III:1960 mouth (See Mouth ulcers) peptic (See Peptic ulcer) perforated (See Perforated ulcers) from steroids, III:1774 stomach (See Stomach ulcer) with syphilis, IV:3227 varicose (See Varicose ulcers) from yaws, V:3589 Ulmus fulva. See Slippery elm Ulnar nerve, IV:2365 Ultane. See Sevofluorane Ultra-rapid cycling, I:486 Ultracentrifugation, III:2008 Ultrafiltration, II:1060 Ultrasonic aspiration, I:572 Ultrasonic diagnosis. See Ultrasonography Ultrasonic therapy. See Ultrasonography Ultrasonography a-mode, I:4, II:1258 abdominal, I:1–5 with abdominal x-rays, III:1923 for acute kidney failure, I:45 with alpha fetoprotein test, I:127 for amebiasis, I:145 for amenorrhea, I:147 with amniocentesis, I:154 for anal atresia, I:169 for aneurysmectomy, I:193 aneurysmectomy and, I:193 for aortic dissection, I:327 for appendicitis, I:342 for ascites, I:372 for atherosclerosis, I:394, 395 3935 Ultrasonography for stress fractures, II:1364 Tunnel vision from glaucoma, III:1457 ultrasonography for, II:1258 Turbinates, IV:2314 Turkish myrrh. See Myrrh Turmeric for amenorrhea, III:2172 for corns and calluses, II:924 for folic acid deficiency anemia, II:1349 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for sore throats, IV:3119 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 Turner-Kieser syndrome. See Nailpatella syndrome Turner syndrome, V:3417–3419, 3418 Turner’s sign, IV:2479 Turner’s syndrome amenorrhea from, I:146, III:2169 with aortic coarctation, II:830 FSH test for, II:1351 sex hormone tests for, IV:3013 Turpentine, delirium from, II:1021 Twelve step programs, I:52, 98, II:834, IV:2768, V:3574 Twilight anesthesia, II:1275 Twin studies, III:2247, IV:2959 antepartum tests with, I:221 anxiety in, I:319 bed-wetting and, I:454 polyhydramnios with, IV:2664 with sarcoidosis, IV:2940 Two-hour postprandial blood glucose test. See Blood glucose tests Tylectomy. See Lumpectomy Tylenol. See Acetaminophen Tylenol #3. See Codeine Tylenol Cold and Flu. See Antihistamines Tyler, Varro E., III:1619 Tylosis, II:1240 Tympanic membrane aviation medicine for, I:427 cerumen impaction of, II:709–711 in hypothermia, III:1754 in mastoidectomy, III:2133 otoscopy for, II:1121 perforated (See Perforated eardrum) surgery of, II:1123, III:2303–2305 Tympanoplasty, II:1123, IV:2534 Tympanosclerosis, III:2305 Tympanostomy tube. See Middle ear ventilation Tympanotomy. See Middle ear ventilation Type and cross. See Blood typing Type I diabetes. See Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus Type I diabetes mellitus. See Diabetes mellitus Ultrasonography b-mode, I:4, II:1258 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 for bile duct cancer, I:478 for birth defects, I:492 for bladder stones, I:511 with bladder training, I:512 breast (See Mammary ultrasonography) for breech birth, I:595 for bunions, I:615 for cancer, II:634, 636 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 with cataract surgery, II:671 before cesarean section, II:724 for chest drainage therapy, II:744 for childbirth, II:758 for cholangitis, II:774 for cholecystitis, II:779 for cholestasis, II:785 for choriocarcinomas, II:797 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 for congenital amputation, II:887 for congenital brain defects, II:891 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 with CVS, II:799 for cystitis, II:993 for detached retina, IV:2877 for diabetic neuropathies, II:1058 vs. diathermy, III:1560 Doppler (See Doppler ultrasonography) for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1113 for echinococcosis, II:1128 with ECMO, II:1257 for ectopic pregnancy, II:1132 for Edwards’ syndrome, II:1136 for embolism, II:1170 for endometrial cancer, II:1190 for endometriosis, II:1193 endoscopic, IV:2472, 2475 for eye cancer, II:1260 for fecal incontinence, II:1301 for fetal growth retardation, III:1852 for fever, II:1315 for fibroadenoma, II:1321 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1324 for fluke infection, II:1344 for FUO, II:1318 for galactorrhea, III:1376 for gallbladder, III:1379, 1382 for gallstones, III:1387, 1388 for ganglion, III:1392 for gastrectomy, III:1398 for gentetic disorders, III:1430 for head and neck cancer, III:1516–1517 for heart disease, V:3364–3366 for heat treatment, III:1559 for heel spurs, III:1563 for hermaphroditism, III:1847 for herniated disk, III:1629 3936 high-intensity, I:2 for high risk pregnancy, III:1633 for hydatidiform mole, III:1685 for hydroceles, III:1686 for hydronephrosis, III:1689 for hyperparathyroidism, III:1713 for hypersplenism, III:1719 for hyperthyroidism, III:1724 for hypothyroidism, III:1757 with hysterosonography, III:1768 for ileus, III:1779 for incompetent cervix, III:1812 for indigestion, III:1813 for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 vs. intravenous urography, III:1854 for jaundice, III:1883 kidney biopsy, III:1908 for cancer, III:1910 vs. kidney scans, III:1914 for kidney stones, III:2015–2016 for pyelonephritis, IV:2790 with laparoscopy, III:1948 with liver biopsy, III:2017 for liver cancer, III:2020, 2022 for lumpectomy, III:2036 with lymphedema, III:2067 m-mode, I:4 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 mammary (See Mammary ultrasonography) for Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure, III:2123 vs. mediastinoscopy, III:2144 for menstrual disorders, III:2170 for mental retardation prevention, III:2176 for miscarriage, III:2205 vs. MRI, III:2082 for multiple pregnancy, III:2248 for nephritis, IV:2333 for obstetrical emergencies, IV:2384 ophthalmic, II:1258–1259 orbit, II:1258–1259 for ovarian cancer, IV:2441 for ovarian cysts, IV:2446 for pancreatectomy, IV:2469 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2472, 2475 for pancreatitis, IV:2479 for parathyroidectomy, IV:2498 for PCOS, IV:2655 pelvic, IV:2525–2527 for placenta previa, IV:2611 for placental abruption, IV:2613 for pleurisy, IV:2631 for polydactyly and syndactyly, IV:2661 for pregnancy, IV:2697 for premature membrane rupture, IV:2704 with prematurity, IV:2707 prenatal (See Prenatal ultrasonography) for prostate cancer, IV:2731 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2780 for pyloric stenosis, IV:2791 rectal (See Endorectal ultrasonography) with rehabilitation, IV:2846 for renal vein thrombosis, IV:2859 for roundworm infections, IV:2924 saline infusion (See Saline infusion sonography) for schistosomiasis, IV:2955 scrotal (See Scrotal ultrasound) for situs inversus, IV:3060 for spina bifida, IV:3127 for splenic trauma, IV:3141 for stillbirth, IV:3163 for tennis elbow, V:3252 for testicular cancer, V:3257 for testicular torsion, V:3263 for tetralogy of Fallot, V:3269 with thoracentesis, V:3285 thyroid, V:3315–3316 for thyroid cancer, V:3306 for TIA, V:3371 for TMJ, V:3250 transcranial Doppler (See Transcranial Doppler ultrasonography) for transient ischemic attack, III:1869 transrectal (See Transrectal ultrasonography) transvaginal (See Transvaginal ultrasonography) for urinary incontinence, V:3455 vaginal for postmenopausal bleeding, IV:2680 for varicose veins, V:3476 for velopharyngeal insufficiency, V:3490 for ventricular aneurysm, V:3496 for vitrectomy, V:3528 for yersiniosis, V:3593 See also Echocardiography; Endorectal ultrasonography Ultrasound. See Ultrasonography Ultraviolet light conjunctivitis from, II:903 keratitis from, III:1904 lens coatings for, II:1266 macular degeneration from, III:2076 pinguecula and pterygium from, IV:2602 sunscreen for, IV:3220 visual impairment from, V:3511 Ultraviolet light treatment. See Ultraviolet therapy Ultraviolet radiation melanoma from, II:633, III:2096, 2099 phototherapy and, IV:2590 Ultraviolet therapy, V:3435–3437 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 United Nations on female genital mutilation, II:1307 World Health Organization (See World Health Organization) United Network for Organ Sharing on chronic kidney failure, II:808 on heart transplantation, III:1545 on kidney transplantation, III:1920–1921 United Ostomy Association, II:1210 Univasc. See Moexipril Universal donors, I:525 Universal precautions for autopsy, I:425 for bacteremia, I:436 for enteroviruses prevention, II:1213 for hepatitis B, III:1602 for hepatitis C, III:1604 for infection control, III:1822–1823 for lymphogranuloma venereum, III:2072 for patient isolation, III:1872–1873 for rhinitis, IV:2904 for RSV prevention, IV:2869 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for syphilis prevention, IV:3230 for tinea prevention, IV:2909 Universal recipients, I:525 University of California San Francisco, IV:2388 University of Florida, II:1103 University of Minnesota, III:2198 University of Southen California, II:1365–1366 Unsaturated fats. See Dietary fats Upanishads, V:3485, 3595 Upjohn Corporation, III:2202 Upledger, John, II:944–945, 945 Upledger Institute, II:945 Upper endoscopy. See Esophagogastroduodenoscopy Upper GI series, V:3438–3439 for dyspepsia, II:1119 for gastric emptying disorders, III:1402 vs. GI bleeding studies, III:1449 for hiatal hernias, III:1623 for ileus, III:1779 See also Barium swallow Upper motor neurons. See motor neurons Upper respiratory tract infections. See Respiratory tract infections Upper urinary tract infections. See Pyelonephritis Uppers. See Amphetamines Upright position episiotomy and, II:1222 hyperemesis gravidarum and, III:1703 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Uranium, IV:2337 Urate crystals, III:1476 Urea in acute kidney failure, I:45 in E. coli infections, II:1236 in lichen simplex chronicus, III:1998 for nail removal, IV:2310 Urea breath test, III:1406 Urea clearance test, III:1912, 1913 Ureaplasma urealyticum, IV:2360 Urease, III:1567 Urecholine. See Bethanechol Uremia from Alport’s syndrome, I:132 peripheral neuropathy and, IV:2551 Ureter, V:3451–3452 in bladder cancer, I:508 in chronic kidney failure, II:807 congenital anomalies of, II:894–896 in contractures, II:895 in Crohn’s disease, II:957 in cystinuria, II:990 intravenous urography for, III:1854 kidney transplantation and, III:1922 in medullary sponge kidney, III:2149 in nephrectomy, IV:2332 in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 salpingo-oophorectomy and, IV:2939 stents for, V:3439 surgery and, II:896, V:3505 swelling of (See Hydroureter) vesicoureteral reflux in, V:3505 x-rays of, III:1923, 1923–1924 Ureteral obstruction cystometry for, II:994 retrograde ureteropyelography for, IV:2893 Ureteral stents, V:3439–3440, V:3452 Ureteral stones, III:2015, V:3439 Ureterocele, V:3505 Ureteroscopy, II:991 Ureterosigmoidostomy, V:3451 Ureterostomy, V:3452 Ureterovesical valve in congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 with hydronephrosis, III:1689 Urethra in benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1201 in bladder cancer, I:508 with cross infection, III:1674 in cystitis, II:991 damage to from body piercing, IV:2599 from cystoscopy, II:997 from lacerations, IV:2894, 2895 from urinary catheterization, V:3451 in gonorrhea, III:1471 3937 Urethra for dermatitis, II:1037 for pityriasis rosea, IV:2609 for prickly heat, IV:2717 for psoriasis, IV:2757 for psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for vitamin D deficiency, V:3516 for vitiligo, IV:3078 Umbilical cord in breech presentation, I:594 with esophageal atresia, II:1238 fetal growth retardation from, III:1852 Umbilical cord blood. See Fetal blood Umbilical cord prolapse cesarean section for, II:725 Umbilical hernia. See Hernia Unbiased test. See Culture-fair test Unconjugated bilirubin. See Bilirubin Unconjugated estriol in birth defect testing, II:800 Unconscious sedation. See Sedation Unconsciousness from acidosis, III:2179 from Addison’s disease, I:54 from barbiturate-induced coma, I:444 from benzodiazepines, I:467 from concussion, II:879 from diabetes insipidus, II:1047 dizziness and, II:1094 from fainting, II:1279 from gas embolism, III:1396 from head injuries, III:1521 from heat stress disorders, III:1557 Heimlich maneuver for, III:1564 from inert gas narcosis, IV:2356, 2357 from Japanese encephalitis, III:1879 post-concussion syndrome after, IV:2678 from prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2724 from ventricular fibrillation, V:3500 Undecylinic acid, for fungal infections, I:270 Underactive neurogenic bladder. See Neurogenic bladder Underarm brace, IV:2972 Undescended testes, V:3437–3438 in hypogonadism, III:1738 testicular surgery for, V:3261 Undescended testicles, V:3256 Undifferentiated large cell lung cancer, III:2043 Undifferentiated schizophrenia, IV:2959 Undulant fever. See Brucellosis Unilateral acoustic neuroma. See Acoustic neuroma Unipen. See Nafcillin Unipolar depression. See Depression Urethra with hydronephrosis, III:1689 with Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure, III:2123, 2124 menopause and, III:2159 in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 nongonococcal infection of, IV:2359–2360 retrograde urethrography and, IV:2894 stricture of, I:440, II:1203, 1219, V:3453 in urinary tract infections, V:3447 urine flow test for, V:3457 Urethral discharge in Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2851 Urethral diseases cystoscopy for, II:996 Urethral fistula. See Urinary fistula Urethral inserts for urinary incontinence, V:3455 Urethral suppositories, IV:3052 Urethritis, V:3440–3441, 3441 with epididymitis, II:1219 gay health and, III:1416 from gonorrhea, III:1474 in men, III:2167 sexual dysfunctions with, IV:3016 See also Urinary tract infections Urge incontinence. See Urinary incontinence Uric acid in acute kidney failure, I:45 from chronic kidney failure, II:806 in Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 gout from, III:1476, 1478–1479 high levels of, I:281–282 (See also Hyperuricemia) kidney damage from, IV:2337 kidney function tests for, III:1913 Uric acid stones, III:1917, 1919 Uric acid tests, V:3441–3443 Uricosuria, V:3442 Uricosuric agents, III:1477 Uridyl diphosphogalactose-4epimerase, galactosemia III, III:1377 Urinalysis, V:3443–3447 for acidosis, III:2179 for acute kidney failure, I:45 for acute leukemia, III:1988 for adenoviruses, I:57 for adrenal gland cancer, I:60 for AIDS, I:80 for alcohol-related neurologic disease, I:93 for Alport’s syndrome, I:131 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:137 for amylase, I:160 for amyloidosis, I:162 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 for anorexia nervosa, I:212 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311 for appendicitis, I:342 3938 for APSGN, I:48 with arthroplasty, I:361 with arthroscopic surgery, I:363 for ascites, I:372 for balanitis, I:440 for bed-wetting, I:454 for Bence Jones protein, I:464 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 for beriberi, I:470 with beta2-microglobulin test, I:474 after bites, I:500 for bladder cancer, I:507 for bladder stones, I:510 with bladder training, I:512 with bowel resection, I:564 for brucellosis, I:606 for cancer, II:634 for carcinoid tumors, IV:2343 for catecholamines, II:677, 678 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for cocaine, II:833 for colostomy, II:862 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885 for congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 for cross infection, III:1675 for cystitis, II:993 with cystoscopy, II:996 for dehydration, II:1017 for delirium, II:1022 for diabetes mellitus, II:1050 for diabetic ketoacidosis, II:1055 for diarrhea, II:1066 for drug overdose, II:1105 for eclampsia, IV:2693 in electrolyte tests, II:1157 for endocrine pancreatic cancer, IV:2472 for epididymitis, II:1219 for Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 with fracture repair, II:1361 for fructose intolerance, III:1621 for galactorrhea, II:1374 for gastrostomy, III:1411 for glomerulonephritis, III:1462 for Goodpasture’s syndrome, III:1475 for heavy metal poisoning, III:1561 for hernias, III:1627 for histiocytosis, III:1639 in homeostasis monitoring, III:2000 before HRT, III:1673 for hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 for hypercalcemia, III:1697 for hyperemesis gravidarum, III:1702 for hypertension, III:1722 for hypokalemia, III:1740 for hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 for hypothermia, III:1754 for hysterectomy, III:1763 for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, III:1803 for insecticide poisoning, III:1842 for Kawasaki syndrome, III:1902 with kidney function tests, III:1912, 1913 for kidney stones, III:1917–1918 for kidney transplantation, III:1921 with kneecap removal, III:1928 for laryngeal cancer, III:1952 for Legionnaires’ disease, III:1973 for leptospirosis, III:1982 for liver encephalopathy, III:2023 for luteinizing hormone, III:2056 for malnutrition, III:2104 with MAO inhibitors, III:2213 for Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure, III:2123 in men’s health, III:2165 for menstrual disorders, III:2170 with mental status examination, III:2178 for metabolic alkalosis, III:2180 for mineral deficiencies, III:2192 for mineral toxicity, III:2195 for movement disorders, III:2222 for multiple myeloma, III:2240 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 for myelofibrosis, III:2282 for myoglobin, III:2291 for nephritis, IV:2333–2334 for nephrotic syndrome, IV:2335 for nephrotoxic injury, IV:2337 for neuroblastoma, IV:2341 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2347 for nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 for orchitis, IV:2408 for pancreatic cancer, IV:2474 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 for perinatal infection, IV:2542 for periodic paralysis, IV:2544 for pheochromocytoma, IV:2578 with physical examination, IV:2593 for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 for poisoning, IV:2645 for polycystic kidney disease, IV:2653 for preeclampsia, IV:2693 for pregnancy, I:219, 220 prenatal, IV:2697 protein electrophoresis as, IV:2747 for protein-energy malnutrition, IV:2744 for puerperal infection, IV:2774 for pyelonephritis, IV:2789 with pyloroplasty, IV:2792 for renal artery occlusion, IV:2855 for renal tubular acidosis, IV:2858 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for schistosomiasis, IV:2955 for scromboid, II:1335 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 shock and, IV:3034 testing of, V:3457–3458 Urinary retention from benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1201–1202 cystometry for, II:994 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 Urinary schistosomiasis, IV:2954 Urinary sphincter electromyography of, II:1255–1256 in neurogenic bladder, IV:2346 Urinary tract abnormalities of alpha fetoprotein test for, I:127 cystoscopy for, II:996 fetal, with esophageal atresia, II:1238 in gonorrhea, III:1472, 1473 in granuloma inguinale, III:1483 idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura and, III:1777 obstruction of acute kidney failure from, I:44 from bladder stones, I:510 cholinergic agents with, II:794 with creatinine test, II:949 from cutis laxa, II:978 from dicyclomine, I:309 hydronephrosis from, III:1689 kidney scans for, III:1915 urinalysis for, V:3446 surgery of for bed-wetting, I:454 local anesthesia for, I:190 Urinary tract infections, II:991–994 bacteremia from, I:436 bed-wetting from, I:454 bladder cancer from, I:507 bladders stones from, I:510, 511 with cancer, II:641 from cesarean section, II:726 circumcision and, II:812–813 from congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 from cystinuria, II:990 cystometry for, II:994 cystoscopy and, II:996 with diabetes mellitus, II:1049 from diaphragms, II:912 from diverticulum, II:888 drugs for, V:3447–3450 from E. coli, II:1235 endocarditis from, II:1184 from enterostomies, II:1211 erythromycins for, II:1232 from female genital mutilation, II:1307 fluoroquinolones for, II:1344 hospital acquired, III:1674, 1675 with hydronephrosis, III:1689 kidney stones from, III:1917 with low back pain, III:2032 in men, III:2165 multiple sclerosis with, III:2253 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from Mycoplasma, III:2278 in nephritis, IV:2333 penicillin for, IV:2527 premature labor from, IV:2701 with prostatitis, IV:2740 pseudomonas infections and, IV:2751 in pyelonephritis, IV:2789–2790 retrograde cystography for, IV:2892 from schistosomiasis, IV:2954 with septic shock, IV:3005 from sildenafil citrate, IV:3054 from spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 from streptococcus agalactiae, IV:2541 sulfonamides for, IV:3215–3216 tetracyclines for, V:3266 upper (See Pyelonephritis) urinalysis for, V:3446 from urinary catheterization, V:3451 from urinary incontinence, V:3455 urine culture for, V:3456 Urination in bed-wetting, I:453–456 bladder control for, I:511–512 with female genital mutilation, II:1306–1307 pyelonephritis and, IV:2789 Urination disorders from adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 with antiarrhythmics, I:236 from benign prostatic hyperplasia, IV:2737 from bladder stones, I:510 from chronic kidney failure, II:807 from dehydration, II:1017 from Depo-Provera, II:1032 from diabetes insipidus, II:1046 from diabetes mellitus, II:1049 with diuretics, II:1088 from dronabinol, II:645 electrolyte imbalance from, II:1157 hydronephrosis from, III:1689 from hypercalcemia, III:1697 from kidney cancer, III:1909 Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure for, III:2123 in men, III:2167 with methadone, III:2182 nausea with, IV:2324 from neurogenic bladder, IV:2346–2348 from pregnancy, IV:2695 from prostate cancer, IV:2730 from prostatitis, IV:2740 from traction, V:3358 with tricyclic antidepressants, I:260 Urine in acute kidney failure, I:44 in bed-wetting, I:454 in congenital ureter anomalies, II:894, 895 discoloration of, I:311 in kidneys, III:2149 3939 Urine for serum sickness, IV:3007 for smallpox, IV:3096 for spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 for splenic trauma, IV:3141 for substance abuse, IV:3209, 3210 for sugar with gout drugs, III:1479 before surgery, III:1426 with TORCH test, V:3338 uric acid tests as, V:3441 with urinary diversion, V:3452 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 for vagotomy, V:3470 for vitamin toxicity, V:3523 See also Human chorionic gonadotropin test Urinary anti-infective agents, V:3447–3450 Urinary bladder cancer, I:555 Urinary catheterization, V:3450–3451 bacteremia from, I:436 with bowel resection, I:564 with cholecystectomy, II:777 with colostomy, II:862 cross infection from, III:1674 cystitis from, II:992 for hydronephrosis, III:1690 with kidney transplantation, III:1920 with Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure, III:2123 for urinalysis, V:3443–3444 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 for urine cultures, V:3456 for vesicoureteral reflux, V:3505 Urinary diversion, IV:2348, V:3451–3453 Urinary fistula from chancroid, II:730 retrograde urethrography for, IV:2895 Urinary incontinence, V:3453–3456, 3454f from bladder stones, I:510 bladder training for, I:511–512 episiotomy and, II:1222 HRT and, III:2160 from hydrocephalus, V:3502 from menopause, III:2159 from neurogenic bladder, IV:2346–2348 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 sitz bath for, IV:3062 sphincter electromyography for, II:1255 stress (See Stress urinary incontinence) urinary catheterization for, V:3450 Urinary output with bladder stones, I:510–511 with diuretics, II:1088 escherichia coli and, III:1580 with Fanconi’s syndrome, II:1290 intravenous urography for, III:1855 Urine bag Urine bag, II:983 Urine culture, IV:2789, V:3456–3457 Urine cytology test, I:507 Urine flow. See Urinary output Urine osmolality test, III:1912, 1913 Urine protein test, III:1912–1913 Urine tests. See Urinalysis Urobak. See Sulfasalazine Urobilinogen, V:3446 Urodynamic test with bladder training, I:512 for Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure, III:2123 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 for urinary incontinence, II:1255 Uroflowmeter for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 for urine flow test, V:3457 Urofollotropins, III:1830 Urogenital abnormalities, II:1136 Urography, III:1854 with abdominal x-rays, III:1923 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 intravenous (See Intravenous urography) for kidney stones, III:2016 for medullary sponge kidney, III:2149 Urokinase for Budd-Chiari syndrome, I:610 for embolism, II:1171 with fibrinogen test, II:1320 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3298, 3299 Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase, IV:2673 Uroporphyrinogen III cosynthase gene, IV:2673 Urostomy for bladder cancer, I:508 defined, IV:2429–2430 with urinary diversion, V:3452 Ursodeoxycholic acid for gallstone removal, III:1386 for primary biliary cirrhosis, IV:2718 Urtica dioica. See Nettle Urticaria. See Hives; Hives (Disease) Urticaria pigmentosa, III:2132, 2133 U.S. Army Medical Research Institute for Infectious Diseases, III:2212 U.S. Code, on rape and sexual assault, IV:2816 U.S. Consumer Safety Products Commission, II:765 U.S. Department of Agriculture, IV:2368–2369 on atherosclerosis, I:397 on botulism, I:562 3940 on coronary heart disease prevention, II:933 on healthy diet, IV:2744 on heart-healthy diet, III:1535 on meat irradiation, III:1581 on nutrition, III:2105 U.S. Department of Defense, I:224 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services on atherosclerosis, I:397 on healthy diet, IV:2744 on heart-health eating, III:1535 on nutrition, III:2105 U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Alzheimer’s disease, I:135, 138, IV:2998, 3000 on astigmatism, I:386 on autoclaves, IV:2599 on blood donation, V:3367 on blood typing and crossmatching, I:531 on bone growth stimulation, I:546 on breast implants, I:586, 589 on carbamazepine, I:487, III:2113 on cell therapy, II:688 on chelation therapy, II:738 on cholestin, II:788 on clitoral therapy device, II:1308 on cochlear implants, II:838 on decongestants, II:1012 on drug interactions, II:1103 on DTaP, V:3265 on electrodermal testing, I:118 on emergency contraception, IV:2819 on enzymes, II:1215 on folic acid, II:1347 on food poisoning, II:1353 on glaucoma, III:1459, 1461 on hepatitis vaccines, III:1416 on herbal medicine, III:1620 on high cholesterol, II:786, 787 on impotence drugs, III:1805–1806 on interferon-alpha, III:1503 on laser surgery, III:1962 on lead poisoning, III:1967 on listeriosis, III:2012 on Lunelle, II:1031 on Lyme disease test, III:2059 on mammogram certification, III:2110 on meat irradiation, III:1581 on mifepristone for abortion, III:2186 on minoxidil, III:2202 on motion sickness, III:2219 on multiple sclerosis therapy, III:2252–2253 on opioid analgesics, I:175 on pancreatic cancer treatment, IV:2477 on pap smear, IV:2486 on PEG-ADA, IV:3010 on polycythemia vera, IV:2659 on PRK and LASIK, IV:2586 on rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901 on serum sickness, IV:3008 on sibutramine for obesity, IV:2376 on sildenafil citrate, IV:3052 on smoking cessation drugs, IV:3103, 3109 on St. John’s wort, IV:3152 on sunscreens, IV:3220 on tamoxifen, I:584 on tampons, V:3348 on tazarotene, IV:2757 on tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3395 on vegetarianism, V:3487 U.S. Mine Safety and Health Administration, IV:3056 U.S. Pentagon, III:1495 U.S. Pharmacopeia, III:1616 U.S. Preventative Services Task Force on cervical cancer screening, IV:2517 on physical examination, IV:2593 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, II:1162 U.S. Public Health Service, I:85 U.S. Renal Data System, II:808 USDA. See U.S. Department of Agriculture USPSTF. See U.S. Preventative Services Task Force Usual interstitial pneumonitis. See interstitial lung diseases Usui, Mikao, IV:2848–2849 Uta. See Cutaneous leishmaniasis Uterine biopsy hysterosonography for, III:1768 Uterine cancer, II:631–634, 636, 1188–1192, II:1189 from choriocarcinoma, II:797, 798 D & C for, II:1075 vs. dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 endometrial biopsy for, II:1186 with hormone replacement therapy, III:2160, 2161 from hydatidiform mole, III:1685 hysterectomy for, III:1760, 1761 with myomectomy, III:2292 with oligomenorrhea, IV:2388 with oral contraceptives, IV:2402 from tamoxifen, I:248 with testosterone, III:1738 ultrasonography for, IV:2525 See also Cancer; Endometrial cancer Uterine contraction cesarean section and, II:725 in childbirth, II:757 in induced labor, III:1816 from oxytocin, II:1109 in premature labor, IV:2701 Uterine diseases GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 in ectopic pregnancy, II:1130 in hermaphroditism, III:1847 inversion rupture of, IV:2383 IUD in, III:1877 menopause and, III:2159 with multiple pregnancy, III:2248 with nongonococcal urethritis, IV:2360 in placenta previa, IV:2610 polyps in endometrial biopsy for, II:1186 hysteroscopy for, III:1767, 1768 hysterosonography for, III:1768 postmenopausal bleeding and, IV:2680 in premature membrane rupture, IV:2703 tear of from induced labor, II:1109 UTI. See Urinary Tract Infections; Urinary tract infections Uticaria. See Hives (Disease) UTIs. See Urinary tract infections UV-A, IV:3220 UV-B, IV:3220 Uva ursi, I:511 Uvea cancer of (See Intraocular melanoma) Uveitis, V:3460–3463, 3461 with Behcet’s syndrome, I:459 cataracts from, II:673 granulomatous (See Granulomatous uveitis) from leptospirosis, III:1982 Uvulopalatopharyngyoplasty, IV:3085, 3112 V V-Cillin. See Penicillins V-Cillin K. See Penicillin V V-fib. See Ventricular fibrillation V/Q scan. See Lung ventilation scan V-tach. See Ventricular tachycardia VABS. See Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale VacA, from Helicobacter pylori, III:1566 Vaccination, V:3465–3469, 3466t, 3467f for chickenpox, II:749, 752–753 for complement deficiencies, II:874 COPD and, II:811 for hepatitis C, III:2022 keloids from, III:1903 for mumps, III:2256 for paratyphoid fever, IV:2499 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634–2635 for rabies, I:207–208 for rubella, IV:2927–2928 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 with silicosis, IV:3056 with splenectomy, IV:3139 TB tests and, V:3403 for trachoma, V:3356 for tularemia, V:3411 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 See also Immunization Vaccines for adenoviruses, I:47 anaphylaxis from, I:179 for anthrax, I:223–224, 225, V:3465 BCG (See BCG vaccine) for brucellosis, I:606 for cancer (See Cancer vaccines) for chickenpox, II:749, 752–753 cholera (See Cholera vaccine) for cholera, II:782 with delayed hypersensitivity test, II:1020 with DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 for diphtheria, II:1078 for E. coli infections, II:1237 for encephalitis, II:1179 Guillain-Barré syndrome with, III:1492 for hemorrhagic fevers, III:1592 for hepatitis A, III:1597 for hepatitis B, III:1602 for hepatitis D, III:1606 hib (See Hib vaccine) for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1647–1648 immunization with, V:3465 for infection control, III:1822 influenza (See Influenza vaccine) for Japanese encephalitis, III:1880 for Lyme disease, III:2060 malaria (See Malaria vaccines) for malaria, I:286, III:2090–2091 for meningitis, III:2155 for meningococcemia, III:2158 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for peripheral neuropathy prevention, IV:2554 for plague, IV:2616 for Q fever, IV:2798 for rabies, IV:2801–2803 for rotaviruses, IV:2923 for schistosomiasis, IV:2955 for scrub typhus, IV:2977 serum sickness from, IV:3008 for STDs, IV:3022 for Streptococcus pneumoniae, IV:2640 for tetanus, V:3265–3266 for tuberculosis, V:3410 for tumors (See Tumor vaccines) for yellow fever, V:3591 Vaccines for Children program on chickenpox, II:752 Vaccinium myrtillus. See Bilberry VACTERL, IV:2661 3941 VACTERL vs. dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 HSG for, III:1765 Uterine fibroids, V:3458–3460, 3459f D & C for, II:1075 vs. dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 dysmenorrhea from, III:2170 endometrial biopsy for, II:1186 high-risk pregnancy and, III:1632 from HRT, III:1673 hysterectomy alternatives for, III:1760–1761 hysterectomy for, III:1760, 1761–1762 hysteroscopy for, III:1767, 1768 hysterosonography for, III:1768 with infertility drugs, III:1831 infertility from, III:1832 laser surgery for, III:1960 menorrhagia from, II:1112, III:2170 myomectomy for, III:2292–2293 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 placental abruption from, IV:2612 Uterine hemorrhage from colposcopy, II:866 after CVS, II:801 D & C for, II:1075 dysfunctional (See Dysfunctional uterine bleeding) Uterine perforation from cervical conization, II:717 from endometrial biopsy, II:1187 from hysteroscopy, III:1768 from IUDs, II:912, III:1877 Uterine prolapse hysterectomy for, III:1760 from pelvic relaxation, IV:2524 Uterine surgery for recurrent miscarriage, IV:2837 Uterus abnormalities of from DES exposure, II:1039–1040 hysterosonography for, III:1768 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 placental abruption from, IV:2612 polydactyly and syndactyly from, IV:2661 recurrent miscarriages and, IV:2836 in amenorrhea, I:146 in birth control, IV:2401 bleeding of endometrial biopsy for, II:1186 in cervical conization, II:717 contractions of (See Uterine contraction) cysts in amenorrhea from, I:147 in dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1112 in dysmenorrhea, III:2170 Vacuum aspiration Vacuum aspiration. See Vacuum curettage Vacuum-assisted birth, II:759 Vacuum curettage, I:10, 11 vs. D & C, II:1076 for hydatidiform mole, III:1685 Vacuum therapy for impotence, III:1805 Vagina abnormalities of from DES exposure, II:1039–1040 in amenorrhea, I:146 in cervical conization, II:717 in childbirth, II:757 colposcopy of, II:864 in congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 in female genital mutilation, II:1306 with genital herpes, III:1441 menopause and, III:2159, 2160 narrowing of after sex change surgery, IV:3011 Vaginal biopsy colposcopy for, II:864 Vaginal birth after c-section, II:725 vs. c-section, II:724 Vaginal bleeding after amniocentesis, I:155 antepartum tests with, I:221 after CVS, II:801 Depo-Provera/Norplant with, II:1031, 1032 with endometrial cancer, II:1189, 1191 from hemorrhagic fevers, III:1591, 1592 from hormone replacement therapy, III:2162 hysterectomy for, III:1760, 1761–1762 hysterosonography for, III:1768 in miscarriage, III:2204 from placenta previa, IV:2611 in pregnancy, IV:2697 Vaginal cancer colposcopy for, II:864 from DES, II:1039 pelvic examination for, II:634 radiation therapy for, II:639 Vaginal culture for premature labor, IV:2701 Vaginal discharge with PID, IV:2521, 2524 with trichomoniasis, V:3387 urinalysis and, V:3443 from vulvovaginitis, V:3539, 3540, 3541 Vaginal diseases high-risk pregnancy and, III:1632 in premature labor, IV:2701 3942 Vaginal examination for premature labor, IV:2701 Vaginal herpes. See Genital herpes Vaginal hysterectomy, III:1762–1763 Vaginal pain, V:3469–3470 Vaginal spotting. See Uterine hemorrhage Vaginal stenosis, II:1191 Vaginal surgery, IV:2835 Vaginal ultrasonography, IV:2680 Vaginal yeast infection. See Vulvovaginal candidiasis Vaginismus, II:1308, IV:3015, 3016 See also Female sexual arousal disorder Vaginitis from enterobiasis, II:1208 from oral contraceptives, IV:2404 pap smear for, IV:2484, 2517 sexual arousal disorder from, II:1308 from streptococcus agalactiae, IV:2541 Vaginosis bacterial gay and lesbian health and, III:1415 PID and, IV:2522 Vagistat. See Tioconazole Vagotomy, V:3470–3471 pyloroplasty with, IV:2792 with ulcer surgery, V:3428 for ulcers, III:1398 Vagus nerve in fainting, II:1280 in hiccups, III:1632 Vagus nerve stimulation, IV:2988 Valacyclovir for facial paralysis, I:463 for genital herpes, III:1442 for shingles, II:751–752, IV:3032 for viral infections, I:315, 316 Valerian for alcoholism, I:98 with central nervous system depressants, II:689 for cluster headache, II:825 for headache, III:1524 for IBS, III:1867 for menopause, III:2162 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for sleep disorders, IV:3092 for tension headache, V:3255 Valerian root for drug addictions, II:833 Valeriana officinalis. See Valerian Valine in brain proteins, II:952 in hemoglobinopathies, III:1577 Valium. See Diazepam Valley fever. See Coccidioidomycosis Valnet, Jean, I:348 Valporic acid, IV:2987 Valproate. See Valproic acid Valproic acid with alprazolam, I:233 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 with aspirin, I:379 with barbiturates, I:447 for bipolar disorder, I:487 for borderline disorder, IV:2566 with cephalosporins, II:694 for convulsions, I:253 with erythromycins, II:1233 with estrogens, III:1670 with fibrinogen test, II:1320 with gout drugs, III:1481 for hiccups, III:1632 for mania, III:2113 for mood disorders, III:2217 for neuralgia, IV:2340 pancreatitis from, IV:2478 with penicillins, IV:2529 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3300 Valproic acid derivatives, I:288 Valsalva’s maneuver, I:427, V:3471–3472 in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, III:1726 for neurogenic bladder, IV:2348 for Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 Valsartan, I:279–281 Valtrex. See Valacyclovir Valvular heart disease. See Heart valve diseases Valvuloplasty, balloon. See Balloon dilatation Valvulotomy for heart valve repair, III:1550 for pulmonary valve stenosis, IV:2788 Van Leeuwenhoek, IV:2995 Vanadium, I:488 Vanceril. See Beclomethasone dipropionate Vancocin. See Vancomycin Vancomycin aminoglycosides and, I:150 for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239 with cholesterol-reducing agents, II:791 for clenched fist injury, II:821 for cross infection, III:1675 for empyema, II:1177 for pneumococcal pneumonia, IV:2634 Vandal root. See Valerian Vansil. See Oxamniquine Vaporizers. See Nebulizers and vaporizers GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Raynaud disease, IV:2823–2825 renal artery occlusion from, IV:2856 renal artery stenosis from, IV:2857 sleep disorders with, IV:3000 with thrombolytic therapy, V:3299 Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, II:1138–1139 Vascular malformations, I:493–496 Vascular nevi. See Angiomas Vascular tests, I:355 Vasculitis, I:422, 424, V:3478–3481, 3479 vs. cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 dementia from, II:1024 from hepatitis A, III:1597 from meningococcemia, III:2157–2158 peripheral neuropathy and, IV:2551, 2553 from rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2899, 2900 Sjögren’s syndrome with, IV:3063 from Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552 See also Temporal arteritis Vasectomy, III:2168, V:3481–3482, 3481f bilateral for epididymitis, II:1219 for contraception, II:911 semen analysis for, IV:2994 Vaso-occlusive events, IV:3043 Vasoconstrictor agents with antimigraine agents, I:291 with hemofiltration, I:45 for hemorrhoids, I:275 Vasoconstrictors. See Vasoconstrictor agents Vasodilan. See Isoxuprine Vasodilators, V:3482–3484 for acrocyanosis, I:32 for atherosclerosis, I:395 for Buerger’s disease, I:611 for congestive cardiomyopathy, II:898 for erection disorders, IV:3051–3055 for heart failure, III:1540 for hypertension, I:279–281, III:1722 with plasma renin activity, IV:2617 for pulmonary edema, IV:2779 for ventricular aneurysm, V:3497 Vasopressin deficiency, III:1749 Vasopressin test. See Antidiuretic hormone test Vasopressins, IV:2449 with bed-wetting, I:455 for bleeding varices, I:517 diabetes insipidus and, II:1047 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154 hypernatremia from, III:1710 hyponatremia from, III:1743 for ileus, III:1780 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 test for, I:266–267 Vasopressor agents. See Vasoconstrictor agents Vasospasm, in cerebral aneurysm, II:700 Vasotec. See Enalapril Vasovagal reactions, I:214 Vata dosha, in ayurvedic medicine, I:430 VATS. See Video-assisted thoracic surgery VBAC. See Vaginal birth, after c-section VC. See Vital capacity vCJD. See Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease VDRL test. See Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test Vector-borne diseases, III:2057 Vedas, I:429 Veetids. See Penicillin V Vegan diet. See Veganism Veganism, V:3484, 3487 Vegetable shortening, I:405 Vegetables contaminated by cholera, II:781 for folic acid deficiency anemia prevention, II:1350 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 Vegetarian diet. See Vegetarianism Vegetarian Resource Group, V:3486 Vegetarian Society of Great Britain, V:3484 Vegetarianism, V:3484–3488 Atkins diet and, I:402 fibroadenoma and, II:1322 hatha yoga and, III:1513 for high cholesterol, II:787 mineral supplements for, III:2197 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for PCOS, IV:2656 vitamin B12 for, V:3526 Vegetative state, V:3488–3489 vs.coma, II:869 from X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, IV:2560 Vehicle emissions, lung diseases from, III:2050 Vein occlusion, retinal, IV:2878–2879 Vein restrictions, I:611 Veins abnormalities of arteriovenous fistula as, I:356 access to, V:3493–3494 in arteriovenous malformations, I:357–358 irritation of from diazepam, IV:2984 jugular (See Jugular vein) leg (See Leg veins) portal (See Portal vein) 3943 Veins Vaquez disease. See Polycythemia vera Vaquez-Osler syndrome. See Polycythemia vera Variant angina pectoris, I:194 Varicella. See Chickenpox Varicella vaccine, II:749, 752–753, 762 Varicella-zoster immune globulin for chickenpox, II:752 Varicella-zoster virus with AIDS, I:77 chickenpox from, II:749, 751–752 congenital brain defects from, II:891 otitis externa from, IV:2431 peripheral neuropathy with, IV:2549, 2551 shingles from, IV:3031 TORCH test for, V:3338 Tzanck preparation for, V:3424 Varices bleeding (See Bleeding varices) esophageal (See Esophageal varices) Varicocele, III:2167 infertility from, III:1827, 1832 ultrasound for, IV:2975 Varicose ulcers skin grafts for, IV:3069 from stasis dermatitis, II:1037 Varicose veins, V:3476–3478, 3476, 3477f edema from, II:1135 laser surgery for, III:1960 physical examination of, IV:2594 from pregnancy, IV:2697 thrombophlebitis from, V:3300 traction and, V:3357 Varicosities. See Varicose veins Variegate porphyria, IV:2673 Variola virus, IV:3096–3097 Varivax. See Varicella vaccine Vas deferens in contraception, II:911 with epididymitis, II:1219 in vasectomy, V:3481, 3482 Vascular cancer, III:2143 Vascular collapse, III:1394 Vascular dementia, II:1024 Vascular diseases in anaerobic infections, I:167 with antimigraine agents, I:290 calcium channel blockers with, II:628 campylobacteriosis infection, II:631 cholesterol-reducing agents with, II:790 with decongestants, II:1011 with diabetic foot infections, II:1054 with diuretics, II:1089 with epoetin, II:643 from leptospirosis, III:1982 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 optic atrophy from, IV:2399 pulmonary lung transplantation for, III:2055 Veins pulmonary artery catheterization and, IV:2777 saphenous (See Saphenous vein) varicose (See Varicose veins) Velopharyngeal insufficiency, V:3489–3490 Velvet plant. See Mullein Vena cava in adrenalectomy, I:63 filter, V:3490–3491 in liver transplantation, III:2029 Venereal arthritis. See Reiter’s syndrome Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test, IV:3229 Venereal diseases. See Sexually transmitted diseases Venereal warts. See Genital warts Venesection. See Phlebotomy Venezuelan equine encephalitis, I:347 Venipuncture. See Venous access Venography, V:3492–3493, 3492 for deep vein thrombosis, II:1013 for pulmonary embolism, II:1170, IV:2780–2781 Venoms, I:498, 499, 501–503, 504 allergy tests for, I:123 anaphylaxis from, I:179 delirium from, II:1021 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 Venous access, V:3493–3495 for catecholamines tests, II:677, 678 for reticulocyte count, IV:2874 Venous catheterization, IV:2619 Venous stasis prevention, II:1014 Venous stasis retinopathy. See Retinal vein occlusion Venous switch, II:900, III:1543 Venous thromboembolism. See Thrombophlebitis Venous thrombosis. See Thrombophlebitis Venous ulcers. See Varicose ulcers Venous umbrella devices, with MRI, III:2082 Ventilation-perfusion scan, III:1589 Ventilators after ECMO, II:1257 for food poisoning, II:1356 in life support, III:1999, 2000–2001 mechanical (See Mechanical ventilation) for postpolio syndrome, IV:2684 for respiratory acidosis, IV:2862 for respiratory alkalosis, IV:2862 for shellfish poisoning, II:1336 with tracheotomy, V:3354 Ventilatory failure, IV:2865 Ventolin. See Albuterol Ventral hernia. See Incisional hernia Ventral tegmental area, II:832 Ventricles 3944 cerebral (See Cerebral ventricles) heart (See Heart ventricles) Ventricular aneurysm, II:656, V:3496–3497 Ventricular arrhythmia. See Arrhythmia Ventricular assist devices, V:3497–3498 Ventricular ectopic beats, V:3498–3499 Ventricular fibrillation, I:352, V:3499–3500 CPR for, II:662 electric countershock for, II:666 implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for, III:1803 from ventricular ectopic beats, V:3498 from ventricular tachycardia, V:3503 Ventricular function, II:925 Ventricular hypertrophy from aortic coarctation, II:830 in tetralogy of Fallot, V:3268 Ventricular septal defects, II:900, V:3500–3502, 3501 from Down syndrome, II:1099 surgery for, III:1543 in tetralogy of Fallot, V:3268 Ventricular shunt, V:3502–3503 cardiac blood pool scan for, II:654 with prematurity, IV:2706 Ventricular tachycardia, I:352, V:3503–3504, 3504 electric countershock for, II:666 with electrophysiologic tests, II:1165 implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for, III:1803 from prolonged QT syndrome, IV:2724 Ventricular volume. See Stroke volume Ventriculoperitoneal shunts, V:3502–3503 Verapamil alanine aminotransferase levels from, III:2024 with alpha1-adrenergic blockers, I:131 for cluster headache, II:825 for coronary heart disease, II:931 for hypertension, I:279–281, II:629 with myasthenia gravis, III:2275 for paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, IV:2505 Veratrum album, II:1206 Verbal reasoning, IV:3154 Verbascum thapsus. See Mullein Verelan. See Verapamil Vermox. See Mebendazole Verotoxin-producing E. coli. See Escherichia coli Verruca. See Warts Verruca plantaris. See Plantar warts Verruca vulgaris. See Warts VersedR, II:1165 Version, for breech birth, I:595, II:758 Vertebrae. See Spine Vertebrobasilar arteries, in TIA, V:3371 Vertex position, I:594 Vertical position. See Upright position Vertigo, II:1094 from acoustic neuroma, I:28 benign positional nystagmus from, IV:2372 from labyrinthitis, III:1935–1936 from Meniere’s disease, III:2151–2152 from motion sickness, III:2218–2220 from multiple sclerosis, III:2250 from stapedectomy, IV:3156 Vervain, for menorrhagia, III:2172 Very long chain fatty acids, IV:2560–2561 Very low birth weight, III:2200, 2201 Very low density lipoproteins. See VLDL lipoproteins Vesicles, IV:3074 from chickenpox, II:750 from impetigo, III:1801–1802 Vesicoureteral reflux, II:992, V:3504–3506 Vestibular diseases, II:1095 Vestibular nerve, I:27 Vestibular neurectomy, III:2152 Vestibular schwannomas. See Acoustic neuroma Vestibular system in dizziness, II:1095 in Meniere’s disease, III:2151 in motion sickness, III:2218 surgery of, II:1122 Vestibulocochlear nerve, I:27 Veterans PTSD and, IV:2685 Veterans Administration on Gulf War syndrome, III:1495, 1496 VHL gene pheochromocytoma and, IV:2578 Viagra. See Sildenafil citrate Vibernum opulus. See Cramp bark Vibramycin. See Doxycycline; Tetracyclines Vibration in chest physical therapy, II:746 paresthesia from, IV:2365 physical allergy from, IV:2592 Vibrio parahaemolyticus, V:3506 Vibrio vulnificus, V:3506 Vibriosis, V:3506–3507 Viburnum poulus. See Cramp bark Vicks formula 44. See Dextromethorphan GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Viral conjunctivitis. See Conjunctivitis Viral croup. See Croup Viral culture tests vs. blood culture, I:523 for cytomegalovirus infections, II:998–999 for genital herpes, III:1441–1442 for HIV, I:82 for labyrinthitis, III:1935 for shingles, IV:3032 for skin infections, IV:3068 of sputum, IV:3149 with TORCH test, V:3338 Viral diseases, V:3590–3591 Viral encephalitis. See Encephalitis Viral hepatitis alkaline phosphatase and, I:107 aspartate aminotransferase test for, I:374 vs. autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 cholestasis from, II:783 Guillain-Barré syndrome from, III:1492 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1632 lactate dehydrogenase test for, III:1942 liver transplantation for, III:2028 tests for, III:1610–1612 Viral hepatitis vaccines, II:817 for hepatitis A, V:3465 for hepatitis B, V:3465 with dialysis, II:1061 perinatal infection and, IV:2542, 2543 Viral infections. See Virus diseases Viral load tests, I:80, 85–86 Viral meningitis, III:2154, 2156 Viral orchitis hypogonadism from, III:1738 Viral pneumonia. See Pneumonia Viral STDs. See Sexually transmitted diseases Viral vectors in gene therapy, III:1419–1420, 1422 in yellow fever, V:3590 Viramune. See Nevirapine Virazole. See Ribavirin Virilizing syndromes, IV:2773 Viroptic. See Trifluorothymidine Virus diseases allergic purpura from, I:110 ARDS from, I:67 with asthma, I:380 autoimmune hemolytic anemia from, II:915 vs. autoimmune hepatitis, III:1599 beta2-microglobulin test for, I:473 cephalosporins for, II:692 with chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 with chronic leukemia, III:1991 chronic pain from, IV:2459 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from cisapride, I:273 vs. coccidioidomycosis, II:835 with common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 with complement deficiencies, II:874 congenital heart diseases from, II:900 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 conjunctivitis from, II:903 dehydration from, II:1017 with dermatomyositis, III:2295 diarrhea from, II:1066 drugs for, I:315–317 dyspepsia from, II:1118 vs. enterobacterial infections, II:1206 erythromycins and, II:1232 vs. facial paralysis, I:461, 462 Guillain-Barré syndrome from, III:1492 after heart transplantation, III:1548 hospital acquired, III:1674–1675 with hypokalemia, III:1739 with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1777 immunologic deficiency syndromes and, III:1790, 1791 infection control for, III:1821–1823 keratitis from, III:1905 labyrinthitis from, III:1935 lacrimal duct obstruction from, III:1938 lichen planus from, III:1997 lymphocyte tests for, III:2068 lymphocytopenia from, III:2070 measles as, III:2138 Meniere’s disease from, III:2151 vs. meningococcemia, III:2157 myocarditis as, III:2289 nausea with, IV:2325 paralysis from, IV:2491 Parkinson disease from, I:295 with penicillin, IV:2527 perinatal, IV:2540–2543 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2552, 2553 pulmonary fibrosis from, III:1774 Reye’s syndrome after, IV:2895–2896 skin culture for, IV:3068 sputum culture for, IV:3148, 3149, 3150 with sulfonamides, IV:3216 TB tests and, V:3402 with tetracyclines, V:3266 of the throat, IV:3118 travelers diarrhea from, V:3378 vesicles from, IV:3074 visual impairment from, V:3510 WBC count and differential for, V:3556 from X-linked agammaAntibioticsglobulinemia, V:3585–3586 3945 Virus diseases Victim, Incident, and Offender Characteristics, IV:2817 Vidarabine, III:1442, 1443 Video-assisted lobectomy, III:2054 Video-assisted thoracic surgery, V:3288 Videofluoroscopy, V:3490 Videostroboscopy, V:3529 Videx. See Didanosine Vinblastine for cancer, II:740 ileus from, III:1779 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for testicular cancer, V:3258 Vincasar. See Vincristine Vincasar PES. See Vincristine Vincent’s disease. See Acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis Vincrex. See Vincristine Vincristine for brain tumors, I:572 for cancer, II:740 for Hodgkin’s disease, III:1646 ileus from, III:1779 in MOPP/ABVC chemotherapy, III:1646 for multiple myeloma, III:2242 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 for small cell lung cancer, III:2049 uric acid tests and, V:3442 Vine-that-ate-the-South. See Kudzu Vinegar for candidiasis, II:646 with colposcopy, II:866 genital warts and, III:1444 for jellyfish stings, I:502–503 with sitz bath, IV:3062 Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale, II:1310–1311, III:2175 Viniyoga, III:1514 Vinyl chloride brain tumors from, I:569 liver cancer from, III:2019 Violence vs. bipolar disorder, I:487 from catatonic excitement, II:676 children’s health and, II:763 in conduct disorder, II:882, 883 death in women and, V:3576, 3577 with dissociative identity disorder, III:2245 with intermittent explosive disorder, III:1845–1846 from manganese toxicity, III:2195 physical restraints for, IV:2760 from PTSD, IV:2685 substance abuse and, IV:3206 wounds from, V:3581 Vioxx. See Rofecoxib Viperidae. See Lachesis Vipoma, IV:2471 Vira-A. See Vidarabine Viracept. See Nelfinavir Virus diseases with XLA, V:3585 See also Hemorrhagic fevers Viruses blood culture for, I:523 brain tumors and, I:571 bronchiectasis from, I:596 cancer from, II:633, 635t corneal ulcers from, II:921 diarrhea from, I:264 Goodpasture’s syndrome from, III:1475 hepatitis (See Hepatitis viruses) laryngitis from, III:1957 lymphadenitis from, III:2064–2065 multiple sclerosis from, III:2250 in Paget’s disease, IV:2455 pericarditis from, IV:2538 pityriasis rosea from, IV:2609 T lymphocytes and, III:1986–1987, 2092 vaccination for, V:3465 Visceral leishmaniasis, III:1976 Visceral manipulation, III:1624 Visceral metastases, II:975, 976, 977 Visceral pleura, IV:2628 Vishnudevananda, Swami, I:430 Vision with aging, I:69 binocular (See Binocular vision) blurred from migraines, III:2188 in pregnancy, IV:2697 after trabeculectomy, V:3351 central with macular degeneration, III:2075, 2076 in dizziness, II:1094 peripheral in macular degeneration, III:2075 Vision disorders, I:464–465, V:3509–3511 from albinism, I:89–90, IV:3078 from antiarrhythmics, I:233–234 antiprotozoal drugs and, I:299 with antirheumatic drugs, I:306, 307 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311, 312 from arteriovenous malformations, I:358 from aspirin, I:378 from cataracts, II:671 cataracts with, II:673 from cellulitis, II:684 from cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696 color blindness, II:859–860 from congenital brain defects, II:891 from corneal abrasion, II:918 from Depo-Provera, II:1032 diabetes mellitus and, II:1049 with Down syndrome, II:1099 with eclampsia/preeclampsia, IV:2692 3946 from endarterectomy, II:1182 from epoetin, II:645 from exophthalmos, II:1252 eyeglasses and contact lenses for, II:1265–1268 with galactorrhea, III:1375 from glaucoma, III:1457, 1458, 1461 from hemangiomas, I:494 from hypothermia, III:1754 from hypotonic duodenography, III:1759 from keratitis, III:1904–1906 laser surgery and, III:1962–1963 vs. learning disorders, III:1969 from leptospirosis, III:1982 from macular degeneration, III:2075–2077 from malnutrition, III:2103 from Marfan syndrome, III:2117–2118 from migraine, III:2188, 2189 from minoxidil, III:2203 from mycobacterial infections, III:2277 from myopia, III:2296–2301, 2297 from nalidixic acid, V:3449 with nasal trauma, IV:2318 from nephritis, IV:2334 with paralysis, IV:2492 from peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 from pituitary tumors, IV:2607 pseudoxanthoma elasticum, IV:2755 from radiation therapy, I:574 from Refsum disease, III:2004 from retinal artery occlusion, IV:2875–2876 from rubella, V:3339 from secondary polycythemia, IV:2658 senior’s health and, IV:2997, 2999, 3001 from shaken baby syndrome, IV:3024 from Shy-Drager syndrome, IV:3038 from sildenafil citrate, IV:3054 from subarachnoid hemorrhage, IV:3203 from Tay-Sachs disease, III:2004 from temporal arteritis, V:3247 from TIA, V:3370, 3371 from toxoplasmosis, V:3349 from tropical spastic paraparesis, V:3395 ultrasonography for, II:1258–1259 from whiplash, V:3555 See also Astigmatism Vision loss. See Blindness Vision screening, IV:2608 Vision training, V:3507–3509 after eye muscle surgery, II:1269 for strabismus, IV:3177 Visions, hallucinations as, III:1504 Visken. See Pindolol Vistaril. See Hydroxyzine Visual acuity after cataract surgery, II:675 eye examination for, II:1262 testing of for cataracts, II:675 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 vs. vision training, V:3508 Visual evoked potentials, II:1248 for multiple sclerosis, III:2252 for optic atrophy, IV:2399 Visual field defects, III:1458, 1459 Visual field tests. See Perimetry test Visual impairment. See Vision disorders Visual reasoning, Stanford-Binet intelligence scale, IV:3154 Visual seizures, IV:2985 Visual stimulation. See Photic stimulation Visual therapy. See Vision training Visual training, V:3507–3509 Visualization. See Guided imagery The Vita-Nutrient Solution: Nature’s Answer to Drugs, I:401 Vital capacity in COPD, II:810 with emphysema, II:1173 Vital signs in cardiac rehabilitation, II:659–660 with chest physical therapy, II:747 in dizziness, II:1094 in hypothermia, III:1754 with sedation, IV:2983 with splenic trauma, IV:3141 Vitamin A, V:3524 for acne, I:26 with antiacne agents, I:229 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 bilirubin levels from, III:2024 for blastomycosis, I:513 for cancer, II:637 for cataracts, II:673 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 drug-induced hepatitis from, III:1607 for emphysema, II:1174–1175 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for furunculosis, I:537 for gastritis, III:1407 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 for influenza, III:1835 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for macular degeneration, III:2077 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Vitamin B2. See Riboflavin Vitamin B3. See Niacin Vitamin B5. See Pantothenic acid Vitamin B6. See Pyridoxine; Pyridoxine Vitamin B6 deficiency, V:3513–3517 Vitamin B7. See Biotin Vitamin B9. See Folic acid Vitamin B10. See Folic acid Vitamin B12, V:3524 aging and, I:71 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:140 for anemia, I:183 for canker sores, IV:3170 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 with cobalt, III:2195, 2197 for facial paralysis, I:463 after gastrectomy, III:1399 in malabsorption syndromes, III:2087 for neutropenia, IV:2354 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 paresthesia from, IV:2365 for pernicious anemia, IV:2559 pernicious anemia and, IV:2557–2559 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for shingles, IV:3032 with small intestine biopsy, IV:3095 vegetarianism and, V:3487 vitamin toxicity from, V:3523 Vitamin B12 deficiency bone marrow aspiration for, I:549 canker sores from, IV:3170 complete blood count for, I:521 megaloblastic anemia from, V:3525 neutropenia from, IV:2353 paresthesia from, IV:2365 from starvation, IV:3161 Vitamin B12 deficiency anemia. See Pernicious anemia Vitamin C, V:3328, 3524 aging and, I:71 for allergic rhinitis, I:113 for allergies, I:121 for anemia, I:183 for angiomas, I:496 for bipolar disorder, I:488 for blastomycosis, I:513 for blepharoplasty, I:518 for bruises, I:608 for burns, I:619 for cancer, II:637 for cataracts, II:673 with catecholamines tests, II:677 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for cluster headache, II:825 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cold sores, II:846 for constipation, II:907 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for cough, II:942 with creatinine test, II:949 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for diabetic foot infections, II:1054 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, II:1141 for endometriosis, II:1194 after face lift, II:1276 for fibroadenoma, II:1322 for folliculitis, II:1352 for glaucoma, III:1461 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for hemorrhoids, III:1594 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 with iron, III:1861 for ischemia, III:1871 jaundice from, III:1881 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for macular degeneration, III:2077 for menorrhagia, III:2172 for methemoglobinemia, III:2184 for osteoarthritis, IV:2999 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 with partial thromboplastin time, IV:2507 for PCOS, IV:2656 with pernicious anemia, IV:2559 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 for rectal polyps, IV:2835 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for shingles, IV:3032 for sinusitis, IV:3059 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for sore throats, IV:3120 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for sprains and strains, IV:3148 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 with triglycerides tests, V:3394 vs. vitamin E, V:3518 vitamin toxicity from, V:3523 Vitamin C deficiency osteoporosis from, IV:2996 scurvy from, IV:2977–2978, V:3525 from starvation, IV:3161 stomatitis with, IV:3170 Vitamin C deficiency anemia, I:181, 183 Vitamin D, V:3524 in acute kidney failure, I:44 for DiGeorge’s syndrome, II:1072 Fanconi’s syndrome and, II:1290 after gastrectomy, III:1399 hypercalcemia from, III:1697 for hyperparathyroidism, III:1714 in hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 for multiple myeloma, III:2243 for osteopetroses, IV:2424 for osteoporosis, IV:2428 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 3947 Vitamin D in malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 in malnutrition, III:2104 for measles, III:2140 for menorrhagia, III:2172 for onychomycosis, IV:2391 for osteomyelitis, IV:2421 for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 for PCOS, IV:2656 for retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2881 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for sinusitis, IV:3059 for sore throats, IV:3120 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 toxicity of, V:3526 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 vitamin toxicity from, V:3522 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Vitamin A deficiency, V:3512–3513 chronic obstructive lung disease and, II:1174–1175 keratitis from, III:1905 with keratosis pilaris, III:1907 night blindness from, V:3524 from starvation, IV:3161 visual impairment from, V:3510 Vitamin B for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239–240 for blastomycosis, I:513 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cold sores, II:846 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 for insomnia, III:1845 for lead poisoning, III:1968 for neuralgia, IV:2340 for panic disorder, IV:2483 for paresthesia, IV:2366 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Vitamin B complex for acne, I:26 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for endometriosis, II:1194 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 for shingles, IV:3032 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 Vitamin B deficiency dementia from, II:1025 vs. Hartnup disease, III:1511 Korsakoff’s syndrome from, III:1930 from tapeworm disease, V:3240 Vitamin D with sunscreens, IV:3220 toxicity of, V:3526 vegetarianism and, V:3487 for vitamin D deficiency, V:3517 vitamin toxicity from, V:3522 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Vitamin D deficiency, V:3515–3517 with calcium absorption, III:2190 electrolyte disorders from, II:1154, 1155 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 parathyroid hormone test for, IV:2495 renal tubular acidosis from, IV:2858 rickets from, V:3524 from starvation, IV:3161 Vitamin D hormone, III:1696 Vitamin D-resistant rickets, IV:2584 Vitamin deficiency. See Avitaminosis Vitamin E, V:3524 aging and, I:71 for Alzheimer’s disease, I:136, 138, II:1026 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for blastomycosis, I:513 for burns, I:619 for cancer, II:637 for cataracts, II:673 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for coccidioidomycosis, II:835 for cold sores, II:846 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for costochondritis, II:940 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 for discoid lupus erythematosus, II:1080 for endometriosis, II:1194 for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1309 for fibroadenoma, II:1322 for fibrocystic condition of the breast, II:1325 for G6PD, III:1465 for genital herpes, III:1443 for histoplamsosis, III:1641 for hypolipoproteinemia, III:1741 for ischemia, III:1871 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for Kearns-Sayre syndrome, IV:2395 for macular degeneration, III:2077 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 for osteoarthritis, IV:2999 for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 for PCOS, IV:2656 for PMS, IV:2711 for premenstrual dysphoric disorder, IV:2709 for radiation injuries, IV:2809 3948 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2881 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for sinusitis, IV:3059 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for sporotrichosis, IV:3144 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 for vitamin E deficiency, V:3518 vitamin tests and, V:3521 vitamin toxicity from, V:3523 for vulvovaginitis, V:3541 Vitamin E deficiency, V:3517–3519 nerve damage from, V:3524 peripheral neuropathy from, IV:2553 Vitamin H. See Biotin Vitamin K, V:3524 for antibiotic-associated colitis, I:239–240 anticoagulants and, I:252, II:829 with antimalarials, I:288 for blepharoplasty, I:518 for bruises, I:608 after face lift, II:1276 for hemorrhagic fevers, III:1592 jaundice from, III:1881 for menorrhagia, III:2172 with nitrofurantoin, V:3449 for Reye’s syndrome, IV:2896 for vitamin K deficiency, V:3520 vitamin tests and, V:3521 vitamin toxicity from, V:3522–3523 Vitamin K deficiency, V:3519–3520 hypoprothrombinemia from, II:828 liver function tests for, III:2027 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 PT test for, IV:2750 from starvation, IV:3161 Vitamin M. See Folic acid Vitamin megadoses, V:3522 Vitamin poisoning. See Vitamin toxicity Vitamin supplements. See Dietary supplements Vitamin tests, V:3520–3521 Vitamin therapy for autism, I:420–421 Vitamin toxicity, V:3521–3524 Vitamins, V:3524–3526, 3525t for AIDS, I:81 for alcoholism, I:98 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:166 with anticoagulants, I:252 for ataxia-telangiectasia, I:388 for cancer, II:637 for children, II:764 for cholestasis, II:785 for chondromalacia patellae, II:796 for cocaine addiction, II:833 for colon cancer, II:853 for congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 by enteral nutrition, V:3401 with epoetin, II:643 excessive malnutrition from, III:2104 for gonorrhea, III:1473 HRT and, III:1673 for hypercholesterolemia, III:1699–1700 for multiple sclerosis, III:2253 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for peroxisomal disorders, IV:2561 for PMS, IV:2711 during pregnancy, IV:2386 with pregnancy, IV:2698 for Raynaud disease, IV:2825 for rectal cancer, IV:2832 for retinoblastoma, IV:2887 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for smokers, IV:3107 for thyroid cancer, V:3306 for tinnitus, V:3323 for vitamin A deficiency, V:3512 See also Dietary supplements Vitex. See Chasteberry Vitex agnus-castus. See Chasteberry Vitiligo, IV:3077, 3078, V:3527–3528, 3527 from polyglandular deficiency syndromes, IV:2663 ultraviolet light treatment for, V:3435 Vitrectomy, IV:2877, V:3528–3529, 3528 Vivactil. See Protriptyline Vivarin. See Caffeine Vivekananda, Swami, III:1513, V:3594 VLBW. See Very low birth weight VLDFAs. See Very long chain fatty acids VLDL cholesterol lipoproteins niacin for, II:789 test for, III:2007 VLDL lipoproteins in cholesterol tests, II:792 in hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1706 in hypolipoproteinemia, III:1741 Vocal cord nodules, V:3529–3530 Vocal cord paralysis, V:3529, V:3530–3531 Vocal cord polyps, V:3529–3530 Vocal cords biopsy, V:3529 cancer in, III:1950, 1952 in cutis laxa, II:978 with epiglottitis, II:1220 injury to, II:1257 in laryngitis, III:1957 Vocal tics. See Tic disorders GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 from sedation, IV:2984 supportive cancer therapy for, II:642–645 See also Hyperemesis gravidarum; Nausea von Ermengem, Emile, I:559 von Gierke’s disease. See Glycogen storage diseases von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, I:569, IV:2472, 2578 von Munchausen, Karl Friederich, III:2257 Von Recklinghausen disease. See Neurofibromatosis von Rosen splint, for congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 von Willebrand, Erik, V:3531 von Willebrand disease, II:826, 828, 829, IV:2626, V:3531–3535 bleeding time test for, I:515 hemophilia and, III:1584 iron deficiency anemia from, III:1860 platelet aggregation test for, IV:2623, 2624 von Zumbusch pustular psoriasis. See Generalized pustular psoriasis; Pustular psoriasis Voyeurism, IV:3018 VP. See Variegate porphyria VTA. See Ventral tegmental area VTEC. See Escherichia coli Vulvae, II:1167 Vulvar cancer, V:3535–3539 pelvic exam for, IV:2519 Vulvectomy for vulvar cancer, V:3537–3538 Vulvitis. See Vulvovaginitis Vulvovaginal candidiasis, II:645, 646, 647, V:3539–3542, V:3540 Vulvovaginitis, V:3539–3542 VWD. See Von Willebrand disease vWF factor, V:3531–3535 VZIG. See Varicella-zoster immune globulin VZV. See Varicella-zoster virus W WAGR syndrome, V:3564 WAIS. See Wechsler intelligence test WAIS-R. See Wechsler intelligence test Walden School, I:368 Waldenstom’s disease. See Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia, V:3543–3547 Bence Jones protein test for, I:464 immunoelectrophoresis for, III:1789 protein components test for, IV:2746 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Walkers. See Assistive technology devices Walking bunions from, I:615 in cardiac rehabilitation, II:659 with congenital hip dysplasia, II:893 with conversion disorder, IV:3114 corns and calluses from, II:924 with heel spurs, III:1562 with manganese toxicity, III:2195 with mental retardation, III:2173 in muscular dystrophy, III:2263–2264 with Niemann-Pick disease, III:2004 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2869 for senior’s health, IV:2998, 2999 with ventricular shunts, V:3502 Walking pneumonia. See Chlamydia pneumoniae; Mycoplasma pneumonia Wall wort. See Comfrey War PTSD from, IV:2685 Warfarin, I:273 with acetaminophen, I:19 as anticoagulant, I:250, 252 with aspirin, I:379 for blood clots, I:408 with blood-viscosity reducing agents, I:520 bruises from, I:607 with cephalosporins, II:694 with cerebral amyloid angiopathy, II:696–697 congenital brain defects from, II:891 for deep vein thrombosis, II:1014 drug interactions with, II:1102, 1103 for embolism, II:1171 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 with gout drugs, III:1480 high-risk pregnancy from, III:1633 for hypercoagulation, III:1702 for mitral valve stenosis, III:2209 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 with opioid analgesics, I:178 pharmacogenetics and, IV:2574 platelet aggregation test and, IV:2623 with prochlorperazine, I:294 for pseudoxanthoma elasticum, IV:2754 PT test and, IV:2749, 2750 for pulmonary embolism, IV:2781 with raloxifene, I:544 after stroke, IV:3197, 3198 with sulfonamides, IV:3218 with systemic antifungal drugs, I:270 thyroxine-binding globulin levels and, V:3312 tooth extraction and, V:3332 3949 Warfarin Vocational counseling for cardiac rehabilitation, II:660 for schizoaffective disorder, IV:2957 Vogt-Koyonagi-Harada syndrome, V:3461 Voice box. See Larynx Voice box cancer. See Laryngeal cancer Voice change, III:1952 Voice disorders T & A and, V:3325, 3326 from vocal cord paralysis, V:3530 Voice prosthesis with head and neck cancer, III:1517, 1518 after laryngectomy, III:1956 Voices, hallucinations as, III:1504 Voltaren. See Diclofenac Volume reduction surgery, III:2053, 2054 Volvulus. See Intestinal obstruction Vomiting acidosis from, III:2179 from anticancer drugs, I:246 antihistamines for, I:276, 277 in ascariasis, IV:2924 blood tube compression for, V:3399 bulimia and, I:612 from chemotherapy, II:742 cyclical, II:980–981 dehydration from, II:1017 drugs for, I:292–294 from dyspepsia, II:1118 electrolyte imbalance from, II:1157 from food poisoning, II:1352–1355 from fructose intolerance, III:1621 from gammaglobulin, III:1392 from heavy metal poisoning, III:1560 from Heimlich maneuver, III:1565 with hemoptysis, III:1588 from hyperkalemia, III:1705 hypokalemia and, III:1740 induced for drug overdose, II:1105, 1106 for shellfish poisoning, II:1336 ipecac for, III:1857–1859 ipecacuanha for, III:1857, 1858 IV fluid replenishment after, III:1853 with jaw fixation devices, III:1885 metabolic alkalosis from, III:2180 mineral deficiencies from, III:2190 from mineral toxicity, III:2194–2195 for mushroom poisoning, III:2268 nausea and, IV:2324–2326, 2325 from obesity surgery, IV:2380 orthostatic hypotension from, IV:2411 poisoning and, IV:2645 with pregnancy, IV:2695 from pyloric stenosis, IV:2791 Warm antibody hemolytic anemia Warm antibody hemolytic anemia. See Autoimmune hemolytic anemia; Hemolytic anemia Warm baths. See Therapeutic baths Warm compresses. See Compresses Warm soaks, II:1325 Warthin tumor. See Adenolymphoma Warts, V:3547–3551, 3548, 3549 vs. corns and calluses, II:924 cryotherapy for, II:962 genital (See Genital warts) laser surgery for, III:1960 nasal, IV:2315 plastic surgery for, IV:2620 skin lesions from, IV:3074 tumor removal for, V:3415 WAS. See Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome Washington, George, II:772 Wasps hives from, III:1642 stings from (See Bites and stings) Wasting syndrome diarrhea from cryptosporidiosis, II:967 protein components test for, IV:2746 protein electrophoresis for, IV:2747 Water cold hypothermia from, III:1753 for constipation, II:907 deficiency of, III:2189–2190 in dehydration, II:1016 in diabetes insipidus, II:1047 diarrhea from, I:264 diuretics for, II:1088 for dry mouth, II:1109 with electric shock injuries, II:1143 excess of overhydration from, IV:2448–2449 exercises for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for sciatica, IV:2964 giardiasis from, III:1450–1451 heavy metal poisoning from, III:1560 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 hot nail removal for, IV:2309 lack of constipation from, II:906 Legionnaires’ disease from, III:1973 on the lungs (See Pleural effusion) for muscle spasms and cramps, III:2261 physical allergy from, IV:2592 with prostatitis, IV:2741 salt mineral toxicity from, III:2194 sodium balance, III:1710 therapeutic use of, III:2195 Water bottle shadow, IV:2539 Water consumption, I:134 3950 Water deprivation test, II:1047 Water elder. See Cramp bark Water-electrolyte balance. See Fluidelectrolyte balance Water enemas, I:565 Water intoxication. See Overhydration Water Piks, II:710 Water pills. See Diuretics Water pollution balantidiasis from, I:441 cryptosporidiosis from, II:967 cryptosporidiosis in, II:967 cyanosis from, II:980 cyclosporiasis from, II:981 giardiasis from, III:1450 guinea worm infection from, III:1494 hepatitis A from, III:1597, 1610 hepatitis E from, III:1608, 1611 keratitis from, III:1905 lead poisoning from, III:1965 listeriosis from, III:2012 mineral deficiencies from, III:2190 multiple chemical sensitivity from, III:2235 mycobacterial infections from, III:2276 schistosomiasis from, IV:2954, 2955 tapeworm infections from, V:3239–3240 travelers diarrhea from, V:3378 tularemia from, V:3411 Water pressure, II:1009 Water purification for amebiasis prevention, I:146 for fluke infection, II:1344 for guinea worm infection, III:1494 Water retention. See Edema Water-seal drainage, II:744 Water therapy. See Hydrotherapy Watkins Bender-Gestalt Scoring System, I:465 Watson, James, III:1422, 1432 Watson-Schwartz test, IV:2673–2674 Wax in multiple chemical sensitivity, III:2234 for nail removal, IV:2310 Wax myrtle. See Bayberry Waxberry. See Bayberry Way bread. See Plantain Waythorn. See Buckthorn WBC. See White blood cell count WDS, I:417 Weakness, muscle. See Muscle weakness Weariness. See Fatigue Weasels, IV:2822 Weather with lung diseases, III:2050 wheezing from, V:3554 Weaver’s bottom. See Bursitis Webbed feet, II:1136 Weber’s test for tinnitus, V:3323 with tuning forks, III:1531 Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scales. See Wechsler intelligence test Wechsler intelligence test, IV:2764, V:3551–3552 for learning disorders, III:1969 for mental retardation, III:2175 Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence. See Wechsler intelligence test Wedge resection for liver cancer, III:2021 for lung cancer, III:2045 for lung diseases, III:2053 Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3552–3553 congestive cardiomyopathy from, II:897 with keratitis, III:1904 with vasculitis, V:3480 Weight, body. See Body weight Weight-bearing exercises, IV:2428 Weight control for angiomas, I:496 for coccyx injuries, II:837 COPD and, II:811 for gay and lesbian health, III:1414, 1415, 1416 with gestational diabetes, III:1448 for heartburn, III:1556 with high cholesterol, II:794 for hypertension, II:627 PCOS and, IV:2655 for pelvic relaxation, IV:2525 for polymyositis, IV:2667 postmenopausal bleeding and, IV:2680 for renal artery occlusion, IV:2856 for renal artery stenosis, IV:2857 for senior’s health, IV:3000 Weight gain amenorrhea from, III:2169 from amylophagia, IV:2596 from binge eating disorder, I:481–482 from cardiac tamponade, II:661 eclampsia/preeclampsia and, IV:2693 edema from, II:1134 from epoetin, II:645 from hormone contraceptives, II:912, 1032 from hysterectomy, III:1763 from menopause, III:2159 from minoxidil, III:2203 in pregnancy, IV:2696 from steroids, I:382, III:1774 from thyroxin, III:1470 Weight loss amenorrhea from, I:146, III:2169 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Wernicke’s syndrome. See Wernicke’s encephalopathy Western aphasia battery, I:335 Western blot test for AIDS, I:79–80, 82–83, 86–87 for Lyme disease, III:2059 for syphilis, IV:3229 Western equine encephalitis, I:347 Western Pacific ALS. See Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Western skullcap. See Skullcap Westheimer, Dr. Ruth, IV:2700 Wet bandages. See Bandages Wet beriberi. See Beriberi Wet body wrap, I:405 Wet drowning. See Near drowning Wet lung. See Pulmonary edema Wet macular degeneration. See Macular degeneration Wheal, IV:3075 Wheal and flare reaction, I:108, 117 Wheelchairs for Friedreich’s ataxia, II:1370 for muscular dystrophy, III:2266 for postpolio syndrome, IV:2684 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3131 Wheezing, V:3554–3555 from calcium channel blockers, II:628 from congenital lobar emphysema, II:894 from ondansetron, II:644 Whinberry. See Bilberry Whiplash, V:3555–3556 Alexander technique for, I:104 head injuries from, III:1520 as malingering, III:2100 Whipple procedure, IV:2476 Whipple’s disease, III:2086 diarrhea from, II:1066 pernicious anemia from, IV:2558 small intestine biopsy for, IV:3095 See also Crohn’s disease Whipworm. See Trichuriasis Whirlpool baths. See Hydrotherapy White bird’s eye. See Chickweed White blood cell count, V:3556–3557 in AIDS, I:84, 85, 86 with antituberculosis drugs, I:311 for appendicitis, I:342 for benign prostatic hypertrophy, II:1202 with chemotherapy, II:741–742 for complement deficiencies, II:874 for dacryocystitis, II:1003 in E. coli infections, II:1236 for epididymitis, II:1219 with FUO, II:1318 with hemophilus infections, III:1587 for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, III:1778 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 vs. leukocytosis, III:1993–1994 for lymphadenitis, III:2065 in lymphocytopenia, III:2070 for nephritis, IV:2334 in neutropenia, IV:2353, 2354 with NSAIDs, IV:2362 with peritonitis, IV:2556 for scarlet fever, IV:2952 with semen analysis, IV:2995 for sepsis, IV:3004 with shingles, IV:3032 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3158 with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, IV:2636 for vasculitis, V:3480 for Wegener’s granulomatosis, V:3553 See also Neutropenia White blood cell differential, IV:2354, V:3557 White blood cells in abscess drainage, I:15 in acute leukemia, III:1986–1987 in asthma, I:380 Bence Jones protein test and, I:464 with beta2-microglobulin test, I:473 blood transfusions of, V:3366, 3368 in chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 in chronic leukemia, III:1990 in common variable immunodeficiency, II:873 defective with G6PD, III:1464 elevated levels (See Leukocytosis) in extrinsic allergic alveolitis, III:1716 in gout, III:1476 indium scan of the body for, III:1815 in interstitial lung diseases, III:1773 in juvenile arthritis, III:1892 in leukemia stains, III:1985 in lymphocyte tests, III:2068 in lymphomas, III:2092 vs. mast cells, III:2132 normal levels of, III:2068 normal ranges for, I:522 production of in neutropenia, IV:2353, 2354 in pulmonary eosinophilia, II:1216 reduction of periodontitis from, IV:2547 synovial fluid analysis for, III:1890 urinalysis for, V:3445 with viral hepatitis tests, III:1610–1612 White ginseng. See Korean ginseng White man’s foot. See Plantain White noise, III:1530 White willow bark, II:940 Whiteheads. See Acne Whitehouse, Mary Starks, III:2225 3951 Whitehouse, Mary Starks from anorexia nervosa, I:211–212 for atherosclerosis, I:397 with Atkins diet, I:400–402 basal gastric secretion test for, III:1400 for binge eating disorder, I:481 after bowel resection, I:564 from Chagas’ disease, II:728 for coronary heart disease, II:933 from cryptococcosis, II:964 diabetes mellitus and, II:1049, 1051 from diarrhea, II:1066 drugs for, IV:2376, 2377 from dyspepsia, II:1118 in FTT, II:1278 gallstones from, III:1388 in gastric emptying disorders, III:1402 from giardiasis, III:1451 for heart attack prevention, III:1535 for hemorrhoids, III:1593 hernias from, III:1623 for herniated disk, III:1631 for high cholesterol, II:789, 790 from histoplasmosis, III:1640 from hookworm disease, III:1667 for hypertension, III:1722, 1723 from hyperthyroidism, III:1724 jaw fixation for, III:1885 from juvenile arthritis, III:1893 from leishmaniasis, III:1975 for low back pain, III:2031, 2033 from malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 for obesity, IV:2376–2378 for papilledema, IV:2488 for PCOS, IV:2655 for Pickwickian syndrome, IV:2597 prepregnancy, IV:2712 prolonged QT syndrome from, IV:2724 for sciatica, IV:2965 for sleep disorders, IV:3000 for snoring, IV:3113 for spurious polycythemia, IV:2982 surgery for, IV:2378–2380 Weight Watchers, III:1485 Weights, for traction, V:3357 Weil-Felix test, IV:2976 Weil’s syndrome. See Leptospirosis Welchol. See Colesevalam Welding, II:903 Well-child check ups, II:761–762, 765 Wellbutrin. See Bupropion Wender Utah Rating Scale, I:412 Wermer’s syndrome. See Multiple endocrine neoplasia Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome. See Korsakoff’s syndrome Wernicke’s aphasia, I:333–334 Wernicke’s encephalopathy, I:92, 93, 94, 96, 97, III:1930–1931 Whitethorn Whitethorn. See Hawthorn Whitsun bosses. See Cramp bark Whitsun rose. See Cramp bark WHO. See World Health Organization Whole blood count. See Complete blood count Whole blood glucose test. See Blood glucose tests Whole forebrain. See Lissencephaly Wholistic medicine. See Holistic medicine Whooping cough, V:3557–3559, 3558 from adenoviruses, I:57 bronchiectasis from, I:596 cough from, II:941 mental retardation from, III:2175 myrtle for, I:349 nasopharyngeal culture for, IV:2321 throat cultures and, V:3293 vaccination for, V:3465 vocal cord paralysis from, V:3530 Whorehouse tea. See Ephedra Whortleberry. See Bearberry; Bilberry Wichereria bancrofti elephantiasis from, II:1166 Widow spiders. See Spiders Widow’s hump. See Dowager’s hump Wild chamomile. See Feverfew Wild cherry bark, II:960 Wild cinnamon. See Bayberry Wild clover. See Red clover Wild endive. See Dandelion Wild hops for influenza, III:1835 for mumps, III:2256 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 Wild hydrangea, IV:2334 Wild tobacco. See Lobelia Wilderness medicine, V:3560–3564 Wilderness Medicine Institute, V:3560 Wildlife, rabies and, IV:2801, 2803 Wilms’ tumor, V:3564–3566, 3565f See also Nephroblastoma Wilson, Michael, IV:2598 Wilson’s disease, V:3566–3569 cirrhosis from, II:816, 817 from copper deficiency, III:2191–2192 copper toxicity and, III:2194 Fanconi’s syndrome from, II:1290, 1291 movement disorders from, III:2221 tremor from, V:3381 uric acid tests for, V:3442 Windflower for bed-wetting, I:455 for chickenpox, II:751 for conjunctivitis, II:904 for indigestion, III:1814 for otitis media, IV:2435 for rubella, IV:2927 3952 Window operation, I:450 Windpipe. See Trachea Wineberry. See Bilberry Winged elm. See Slippery elm Winter blues. See Seasonal affective disorder Winter diarrhea. See Rotaviruses Winter weed. See Chickweed Winterbloom. See Witch hazel Wintrobe, Maxwell, IV:2838 WISC-III. See Wechsler intelligence test Wisdom teeth impacted tooth and, III:1799 tooth extraction for, V:3332 Wiskott, A., V:3569 Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, III:1789, IV:2626, V:3569–3571 Wisteria poisoning, IV:2644 Witch hazel for bruises, I:608 for chickenpox, II:751 for dysfunctional uterine bleeding, II:1114 for episiotomy, II:1222 for furunculosis, I:538 for hemorrhoids, I:275 for measles, III:2140 for rubella, IV:2927 Witch’s candle. See Mullein Withdrawal alcohol (See Alcohol withdrawal delirium) substance (See Substance withdrawal syndrome) Withdrawal syndrome, II:691, V:3572–3574 Wittmaack-Ekbom syndrome. See Restless legs syndrome W.K. Kellogg Company, V:3485 Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, V:3574–3575 catheter ablation for, II:679 myocardial resection for, III:2288 Wolfsbane. See Arnica Wolman disease, III:2004–2005, 2006 Womb. See Uterus Women AIDS in, I:74, 78, 80 Bartholin’s gland cysts in, I:449 brain tumors in, I:570 DES exposure in, II:1039–1040 exercise test on, IV:3192 fibromyalgia in, II:1326 fractures in, II:1363 generalized anxiety disorder in, III:1428 gonorrhea in, III:1472 osteoporosis in, IV:2996 rape of, IV:2817 sexual arousal disorder in, II:1308–1309 sildenafil citrate for, IV:3051–3052 Sjögren’s syndrome in, IV:3063 Women’s health, V:3575–3578 Women’s Health and Cancer Rights Act of 1988, III:2129–2130 Wood dust asthma from, I:380 head and neck cancer from, III:1516 Wood horsetail. See Horsetail Wood spider. See Devil’s claw Woodbine. See Honeysuckle Woodcock-Johnson Psychoeducational Battery, III:1969 Woodcock-Johnson Scales of Independent Behavior for mental retardation, III:2175 Wood’s lamp test. See Black light test Woody Guthrie’s disease. See Huntington disease Wool, II:1037 Word catheter, I:250 Word discrimination scores, I:417 Working through, in psychoanalysis, IV:2762 World Health Organization on acupuncture, I:39 on AIDS, I:74 on bejel, I:460 on cancer, III:2166 on cholera, II:781 on diarrhea, II:1067 on elephantiasis, II:1331 on enterobacterial infections, II:1206–1207 on female genital mutilation, II:1307 on filariasis, II:1330 on infertility, III:2168 on leprosy, III:1978, 1980, IV:2549 on lung cancer, III:2043 on malaria, III:2091 on melanoma, III:2098 on monkeypox, III:2212 on palliative cancer therapy, II:642 on plague, IV:2614 on polio eradication, IV:2650 on rabies, I:207, 208 on schistosomiasis, IV:2953, 2955 on semen analysis, IV:2995 on smallpox, IV:3096 on smoking, I:50 on travelers diarrhea, V:3379 on visual impairment, V:3509–3510 on yaws, V:3589 World Health Organization on marijuana, III:2120 on movment therapy, III:2226 World Hypnosis Organization, III:1730 Worm cysts, I:275 Worms antihelminthic drugs for, I:272–275 guinea worms (See Dracunculus medinensis) GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Wright’s stain in complete blood count, I:522 for granuloma inguinale, III:1483 in Tzanck preparation, V:3424 Wrinkles. See Skin aging Wrist injuries arthrography for, I:359 carpal tunnel syndrome from, II:667–668 Wrist joint arthroscopic surgery for, I:362 arthroscopy for, I:364 with juvenile arthritis, III:1893 Writer’s cramp. See Dystonia Writing disorders. See Dysgraphia Wucheria bancrofti, II:1330 Wycillin. See Penicillins Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, V:3265 Wymox. See Amoxicillin X X-ALD. See X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy X chromosome in adrenoleukodystrophy, I:66 birth defects from, I:491 carrier testing of, III:1433, 1435 in chronic granulomatous disease, II:805 color blindness and, II:859 cutis laxa from, II:978 Fabry’s disease and, III:2003 in fragile X syndrome, II:1366–1367 in hemophilia, III:1582–1584 in hypogonadism, III:1738 in ichthyosis, III:1771 in Klinefelter syndrome, III:1926, 1927 in mucopolysaccharidoses, III:2228 in muscular dystrophy, III:2263 in Turner syndrome, V:3417–3418 X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, IV:2560–2562 X-linked agammaglobulinemia, III:1785, 1790, V:3585–3586 X-linked diseases, III:2263 See also specific diseases X-linked infantile hypogammaglobulinemia. See X-linked agammaglobulinemia X-linked recessive retinitis pigmentosa, IV:2880 X-ray therapy. See Radiation therapy X rays vs. abdominal ultrasonography, I:1 for achalasia, I:20 for achondroplasia, I:22 for acute kidney failure, I:45 for acute leukemia, III:1988 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for adrenal virilism, I:51 for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, I:165 for anaerobic infections, I:168 for anal atresia, I:169 for anemia, I:183 aneurysmectomy and, I:193 for angiomas, I:495 for animal bites, I:207 for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 for aortic aneurysm, I:326 for aortic coarctation, II:830 for appendicitis, I:342 for arteriovenous fistula, I:356 for asbestosis, I:370, 371 in balloon valvuloplasty, I:442 for battered child syndrome, I:453 for bed-wetting, I:454 bladder, III:1923–1924 for bladder cancer, I:508 for bladder stones, I:510 with bladder training, I:512 with bone biopsy, I:538 with bone growth stimulation, I:547 with bowel resection, I:564 for brain tumor, I:571 with breast biopsy, I:576 for bunions, I:615 for bursitis, I:620 for cancer, II:634, 636, 742 with cardiac catheterization, II:656 for carpal tunnel syndrome, II:668 vs. CAT scan, II:875 for cervical spondylosis, II:721 for Charcot’s joints, II:736 chest, II:747–749 with chest drainage therapy, II:743–744 for child abuse, II:755–756 for cholestasis, II:785 for chondromalacia patellae, II:795 for choriocarcinomas, II:797 for chronic kidney failure, II:807 for chronic leukemia, III:1992 for clenched fist injury, II:820 for coccyx injuries, II:837 for colostomy, II:862 for congenital adrenal hyperplasia, II:885–886 for congenital hip dysplasia, II:892 for congenital ureter anomalies, II:895 for contractures, II:913 for Crohn’s disease, II:958 for croup, II:960 for cystinuria, II:990 with cystometry, II:995 with cystoscopy, II:996 for dacryocystitis, II:1003 for deep vein thrombosis, II:1013 for deglutition disorders, II:1242, 1243 for delirium, II:1022 for dementia, II:1026 3953 X rays intestinal (See Intestinal worms) leeches (See Leeches) round (See Roundworms) tapeworm infections, V:3238–3242 trematodes (See Trematodes) Wormwood, III:2090 Wound botulism. See Botulism Wound care, III:1936–1938 for animal bites, I:207, 500–503 aromatherapy for, I:348 with botulism, I:561 for flesh-eating disease prevention, II:1337 with leprosy, III:1978 of radiation injuries, IV:2809 for streptococcal infections prevention, IV:3184 for tracheotomy, V:3354 Wound cultures, I:207 Wound healing, III:1490, 1937–1938 activated charcoal and, I:368, II:731 after animal bites, I:500 bone growth stimulation for, I:546 with debridement, II:1007 with diabetes mellitus, II:1049, 1052 after episiotomy, II:1222 for gangrene, III:1395 with lymphedema, III:2067 with peripheral vascular disease, IV:2555 with steroids, I:382 therapeutic touch for, V:3282, 3283 Wound infection from E. coli, II:1235 flesh-eating disease from, II:1336, 1337 streptococcal antibody tests for, IV:3180 Wounds, V:3580–3584, 3581, 3583f from animal bites, I:206–208, 497–504 bio-oxidative therapies for, IV:2451 botulism from, I:559, 560, 561 cultures for, V:3578–3580 debridement for (See Debridement) enteral nutrition for, V:3401 fingertip (See Fingertip injuries) flushing of, V:3580 for clenched fist injury, II:821 gunshot (See Gunshot wounds) hyperbaric oxygen therapy for, III:1837 recompression treatment for, IV:2826 repair of, III:1936–1938, 1937 skin grafts for, IV:3069 from skin lesion removal, IV:3073 St. John’s wort for, IV:3151 topical antibiotics and, I:244, 245 wilderness medicine for, V:3561 See also Injuries WPPSI. See Wechsler intelligence test X rays dental (See Dental x-rays) for diarrhea, II:1066 for diffuse esophageal spasm, II:1071 for disk removal, II:1081 for dislocations and subluxations, II:1084 for diverticulitis and diverticulosis, II:1092 for diverticulum, II:889 for dizziness, II:1095 for duodenal obstruction, II:1110 of the duodenum, III:1759, 1760 for echinococcosis, II:1128 with ECMO, II:1257 vs. EGD, II:1246 for empyema, II:1176 with endoscopic sphincterotomy, II:1199 for esophageal diverticulum, II:1245 for exstrophy, II:889 of the eye’s orbit, V:3586–3588 for facial paralysis, I:462 for flesh-eating disease, II:1337 for fracture repair, II:1361 for fractures, II:1364, 1365 for frostbite, II:1371 FUO and, II:1318 for gallbladder (See Gallbladder xrays) of gallbladder (See Cholecystography) for gallstone removal, III:1387 for ganglion, III:1392 for gangrene, III:1394 for gastrectomy, III:1398 after gastric acid determination, III:1400 for gastritis, III:1406 for gastroesophageal reflux, III:1554 gastrointestinal, V:3438 for gastrostomy, III:1411 for hammertoe, III:1505 for head and neck cancer, III:1516 for heart valve diseases, V:3474 for heel spurs, III:1563 for herniated disk, III:1628 for histiocytosis, III:1639 in homeostasis monitoring, III:2000 for human bite infections, III:1678 for hydronephrosis, III:1689 for hypoparathyroidism, III:1744 for IBS, III:1866 for ileus, III:1779 for intestinal obstruction, III:1849 for intestinal polyps, III:1851 for intussusception, III:1856 ionizing radiation in, I:2807–209 for iron deficiency anemia, III:1861 for jaundice, III:1883 with jaw fixation, III:1885 kidney, III:1923–1924 for kidney biopsy, III:1908 3954 for kidney cancer, III:1910 vs. kidney scans, III:1914 for kidney stones, III:1917 for kneecap removal, III:1928 for kyphosis, III:1932 for low back pain, III:2032 for lumpectomy, III:2036 for lung transplantation, III:2055 for lymphatic system diseases, III:2066 for lymphomas, III:2093 for malabsorption syndromes, III:2086 with malingering, III:2100 for mallet finger, III:2102 for malnutrition, III:2104 for malocclusion, III:2106 for Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure, III:2123 for maxillofacial trauma, III:2136, 2137 for medullary sponge kidney, III:2149 vs. MRI, III:2082 for multiple myeloma, III:2241, 2243 for mycetoma, III:2275 for Mycoplasma infections, III:2278 for myelofibrosis, III:2282 for near drowning, IV:2327 for necrotizing enterocolitis, IV:2329 for nephritis, IV:2333 for nocardiosis, IV:2358 orbital, V:3586–3588 for orthopedic surgery, IV:2410 for osteoarthritis, IV:2412–2413 for osteochondrosis, IV:2416 osteogenesis imperfecta, IV:2416 for osteogenesis imperfecta, IV:2418 for osteopetroses, IV:2424 for Paget’s disease, IV:2455 for pancreatectomy, IV:2469 for pancreatitis, IV:2480 of the parathyroid glands, IV:2496–2497 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 for pericarditis, IV:2539 for peritonitis, IV:2556 for pituitary tumors, IV:2608 for pneumocystis pneumonia, IV:2636 for polydactyly and syndactyly, IV:2661 for precocious puberty, IV:2691 for prematurity, IV:2707 for primary biliary cirrhosis, IV:2717 for pseudomonas infections, IV:2751 for psoriatic arthritis, IV:2759 for puberty disorders, IV:2773 for pyelonephritis, IV:2790 for Reiter’s syndrome, IV:2851–2852 with retrograde cystography, IV:2892 for root canal therapy, IV:2915 for rotator cuff injuries, IV:2921 for roundworm infections, IV:2924 for sarcomas, IV:2942, 2943, 2944 for scoliosis, IV:2971 for secondary polycythemia, IV:2982 for senior’s health, IV:2998, 2999 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 spinal for ankylosing spondylitis, I:209 for spinal cord injuries, IV:3130 for spinal instrumentation, IV:3135 for splenectomy, IV:3139 for splenic trauma, IV:3141 for sports injuries, IV:3146 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3158 for stomach cancer, IV:3165 for stridor, IV:3194 for superior vena cava syndrome, IV:3222 before surgery, III:1426–1427 for TEF, V:3352 with thoracentesis, V:3285 before thoracic surgery, V:3288 for TIA, V:3371 for torticollis, V:3340 for traction, V:3357–3358 for transposition of the great arteries, V:3374 after transurethral bladder resection, V:3375 for tuberculosis, V:3407 ureter, III:1923–1924 for urinary diversion, V:3452 for urinary incontinence, V:3455 for vagotomy, V:3470 with venography, V:3492 for ventricular septal defect, V:3501 for vesicoureteral reflux, V:3505 for vitamin D deficiency, V:3516 for vitamin deficiencies, V:3525 for vocal cord paralysis, V:3531 for wheezing, V:3554 for whiplash, V:3555 Xalatan, III:1459 Xanax. See Alprazolam Xanthelasma from cholestasis, II:784 from hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1707 Xanthine-oxidase inhibitor, III:1477 Xanthochromia, IV:3202 Xanthoma from cholestasis, II:784 from hyperlipoproteinemia, III:1707 Xenografts. See Heterologous transplantation Xenon 133, I:158 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 Y Y chromosome in hypogonadism, III:1738 in muscular dystrophy, III:2263 YAG capsulotomy. See Yttrium aluminum garnet capsulotomy Yang, I:37, IV:2799 acupuncture and, I:41–42 in sleep disorders, IV:3092 Yarrow for alcoholism, I:98 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for influenza, III:1835 for laryngitis, III:1958 for menorrhagia, III:2172 for nosebleeds, IV:2364 for sinusitis, IV:3059 Yaws, V:3589–3590 Yeast infections. See Candidiasis Yeasts blood culture for, I:523 brain abscess from, I:566 for diarrhea, II:1067 KOH test for, III:1929 for neuralgia, IV:2340 skin culture for, IV:3068 sputum culture for, IV:3149 urinalysis for, V:3447 zinc deficiency and, III:2191 Yellow chamomile. See Chamomile Yellow fever, III:1591, V:3590–3591 allergic purpura from, I:110 vs. dengue fever, II:1027 vaccination for, V:3465 Yellow ginseng. See Blue cohosh Yellow gowan. See Dandelion Yellow jasmine for indigestion, III:1814 for influenza, III:1835 for sore throats, IV:3120 Yellow paint root. See Goldenseal Yellow puccoon. See Goldenseal Yersinia enterobacterial infections from, II:1204 infections from, V:3592–3593 Yersinia enterocolitica, V:3592 Yersinia pestis, IV:2614 Yersinia pseudotuberculosis, V:3592 Yersinosis, V:3592–3593 Yew, IV:2643, 2644 Yin, I:37 acupuncture and, I:41–42 in aging, I:71 qigong and, IV:2799 Yin chai hu. See Chickweed Ylang ylang, I:349 Yodoquinol. See Iodoquinol Yodoxin. See Iodoquinol Yoga, V:3593–3598, 3594f, 3596f for acute stress disorder, I:49 for amenorrhea, III:2172 for anxiety, I:321, IV:2782 for anxiety disorders, I:324 for atherosclerosis, I:396 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 in ayurvedic medicine, I:428 for brain tumors, I:573 for cervical disk disease, II:719 for cervical spondylosis, II:722 for choriocarcinomas, II:798 for chronic bronchitis, II:811 for chronic fatigue syndrome, II:804 for cluster headache, II:825 for constipation, II:907–908 for contractures, II:914 for COPD, II:811 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for dermatitis prevention, II:1039 for dissociative identity disorder, III:2246 for dizziness, II:1096 for dysmenorrhea, II:1118 for emphysema, II:811 for endometrial cancer, II:1191 for genital herpes, III:1443 guided imagery and, III:1490 for hairy cell leukemia, III:1503 for headache, III:1524 HRT and, III:1673 for hyperaldosteronism, III:1695 for hypothyroidism, III:1758 for IBS, III:1867 for indigestion, III:1814, 1815 for insomnia, IV:3092 for ischemia, III:1871 for low back pain, III:2033 for mallet finger, III:2102 for menopause, III:2163 movement therapy and, III:2224, 2227 for nausea, IV:2326 origins of, III:1513 for osteoarthritis, IV:2414 for osteoporosis, IV:2998 for ovarian cancer, IV:2443 for pain management, IV:2460, 2463 GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 for palpitations, IV:2466 for Parkinson disease, IV:2503 for porphyria, IV:2675 for process addictions, I:52 for restless legs syndrome, IV:2871 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2902 for salivary gland tumors, IV:2934 for seizures, IV:2989 for sexual dysfunctions, IV:3017 for staphylococcal infections, IV:3159 for stress, IV:3186 for stress reduction, IV:3189, 3191 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 with therapeutic touch, V:3283 vegetarianism and, V:3484–3485 for weight loss, IV:2377 for wheezing, V:3554–3555 Yoga Journal, V:3594 Yoga Sutra (Patanjali), V:3595 Yogurt for balanitis, I:440 for candidiasis, II:646–647 for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 lactobacillus acidophilus in, III:1410 for salmonella poisoning, IV:2936 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 Yohimbe for drug addictions, II:833 with nitric oxide for female sexual arousal disorder, II:1308 Yolk sac tumors, V:3256 Young Mania Rating Scale for bipolar disorder, I:486 for mania, III:2113 Youth Self-Report, II:883 Yttrium aluminum garnet capsulotomy, II:675 Yu jin. See Turmeric Yucca, IV:2414 Yuppie flu. See Chronic fatigue syndrome Yupze regimen. See Emergency contraception Z Zafirlukast, I:121 Zagam. See Sparfloxacin Zalcitabine for AIDS, I:80, 303, 304 Zaleplon, for insomnia, I:282 Zanamivir, for viral infections, I:315 Zantac. See Ranitidine Zanthoxylum americanum. See Prickly ash Zarontin. See Ethosuximide 3955 Zarontin Xenon lung scan. See Lung ventilation scan Xenotransplant therapy. See Cell therapy Xeroderma pigmentosum, IV:2589 Xerophthalmia visual impairment from, V:3510 from vitamin A deficiency, V:3512, 3524 Xerostomia. See Dry mouth XLA. See X-linked agammaglobulinemia Xylocaine. See Lidocaine Zeilke instrumentation Zeilke instrumentation. See Spinal instrumentation Zellweger syndrome, IV:2560 Zenapax. See Daclizumab Zenker’s diverticulum. See Diverticulum, esophageal Zerit. See Stavudine Zestril. See Lisinopril Zi mu. See Alfalfa Zidovudine with acetaminophen, I:19 for AIDS, I:74, 80, 303, 304 with antimalarials, I:288 with antiprotozoal drugs, I:299 with antituberculosis drugs, I:313 aspirin with, I:378 for encephalitis, II:1179 with erythromycins, II:1233 with gout drugs, III:1480 for HIV, IV:2542 for Kaposi’s sarcoma, III:1899 for lymphocytopenia, III:2070 with NSAIDs, IV:2363 with opioid analgesics, I:178 for progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, IV:2720 after rape, IV:2819 with red blood cell indices, IV:2837 ZIFT. See Zygote intrafallopian transfer Zileuton, for allergies, I:121 Zinc for acne, I:26 for atopic dermatitis, I:405 for bruises, I:608 for burns, I:619 for cold sores, II:846 for common cold, II:872 for coronary heart disease, II:932 for decubitus ulcer, I:458 deficiency of, III:2190–2193 for dermatitis, II:1038 for diarrhea, II:1067 3956 with fluoroquinolones, II:1346 for furunculosis, I:537 for gastritis, III:1407 for glaucoma, III:1461 for gonorrhea, III:1473 for juvenile arthritis, III:1894 for lead poisoning, III:1967 for macular degeneration, III:2077 for menorrhagia, III:2172 for ovarian cysts, IV:2447 for PCOS, IV:2656 for pelvic fractures, IV:2520 poisoning, III:1560–1561 for prostatitis, IV:2741 for rheumatoid arthritis, IV:2901–2902 for rhinitis, IV:2903 for sinusitis, IV:3059 for skin cancer prevention, IV:3067 for smelling disorders, IV:3100 for sore throats, IV:3120 for stomach ulcer, V:3434 supplemental, III:2192 supplements of, III:2196 for systemic lupus erythematosus, IV:3234 toxicity, III:2194–2195 for trichomoniasis, V:3388 for vegetarians, V:3487 for Wilson disease, V:3569 for Wilson’s disease, III:2195 Zinc deficiency, II:737 Zinc oxide for cutaneous T-cell lymphoma, II:977 for diaper rash, II:1063 for enterobiasis, II:1208 for hemorrhoids, I:275 for pityriasis rosea, IV:2609 in semen analysis, IV:2995 for sunburn prevention, I:620 Zinc picolinate, IV:3100 Zinc pyrithione shampoo, IV:2981 Zinc sulfate, for genital herpes, III:1443 Zingiber officinale. See Ginger Ziprasidone, for psychosis, I:300 Zithromax. See Azithromycin Zocor. See Simvastatin Zofran. See Ondansetron Zolicef. See Cefazolin Zollinger-Ellison syndrome. See Gastrinomas Zolmitriptan, for migraines, I:289, 290, 291 Zoloft. See Sertraline Zolpidem for central nervous system depression, II:689 for insomnia, I:282–284 for sleep disorders, IV:3091 Zomig. See Zolmitriptan Zone analgesia. See Zone therapy Zone therapy, IV:2842 Zoonosis, V:3599–3600 Zosyn. See Piperacillin-tazobactam Zovirax. See Acyclovir ZS. See Zellweger syndrome Zuloprin. See Allopurinol Zung’s Self-Rating Depression Scale, II:1034, IV:3092 Zyban. See Bupropion; Buproprion hydrochloride Zyflo. See Zileuton Zygomatic arch, II:1151 Zygomycosis. See Mucormycosis Zygote in ectopic pregnancy, II:1130 in multiple pregnancy, III:2247 Zygote intrafallopian transfer, III:1809, 1829, 1833 Zyloprim. See Allopurinol Zyprexa. See Olanzapine Zyrtec. See Cetirizine GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2
